 Exercise May Aid in Weight Loss. Provided You Do Enough. We make up for some of the calories we burn during exercise, but not all. Can working out help us to drop pounds after all? A provocative new study involving overweight men and women suggests that it probably can, undercutting a widespread notion that exercise, by itself, is worthless for weight loss. But the findings also indicate that, to benefit, we may need to exercise quite a bit. In theory, exercise should contribute substantially to weight loss. It burns calories. If we do not replace them, our bodies should achieve negative energy balance, use stored fat for fuel and shed pounds.  But life and our metabolisms are not predictable or fair, as multiple exercise studies involving people and animals show. In these experiments, participants lose less weight than would be expected, given the energy they expend during exercise. The studies generally have concluded that the exercisers had compensated for the energy they had expended during exercise, either by eating more or moving less throughout the day. These compensations were often unwitting but effective. Some researchers had begun to wonder, though, if the amount of exercise might matter. Many of the past human experiments had involved about 30 minutes a day or so of moderate exercise, which is the amount generally recommended by current guidelines to improve health. But what if people exercised more, some researchers asked. Would they still compensate for all the calories that they burned? To find out, scientists from the University of North Dakota and other institutions decided to invite 31 overweight, sedentary men and women to a lab for measurements of their resting metabolic rate and body composition. The volunteers also recounted in detail what they had eaten the previous day and agreed to wear a sophisticated activity tracker for a week. The scientists then randomly divided them into groups. One group began a program of walking briskly or otherwise exercising five times a week until they had burned 300 calories, which took most of them about 30 minutes. (The sessions were individualized.) Over the course of the week, these volunteers burned 1,500 extra calories with their exercise program. The other group began working out for twice as long, burning 600 calories per session, or about 3,000 calories per week. The exercise program lasted for 12 weeks. The researchers asked their volunteers not to change their diets or lifestyles during this time and to wear the activity monitors for a few days. After four months, everyone returned to the lab and repeated the original tests. The results must have been disconcerting for some of them. Those men and women who had burned about 1,500 calories a week with exercise turned out to have lost little if any body fat, the tests showed. Some were heavier. But most of those who had walked twice as much were thinner now. Twelve of them had shed at least 5 percent of their body fat during the study. The researchers then used mathematical calculations, based on each person’s fat loss (if any), to determine whether and by how much they had compensated for their exercise. The men and women in the group that had burned 1,500 calories a week with exercise proved to have compensated for nearly 950 of those calories, the numbers indicated. Interestingly, those in the other group had also compensated for some of the calories they had burned, and to almost the exact same extent as those who had exercised less, adding back about 1,000 calories a week, the calculations showed.  But since they had expended 3,000 calories a week, they had wound up with a weekly deficit of about 2,000 calories from exercise and lost fat, the researchers concluded. The findings were published in the American Journal of Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology. How the volunteers had compensated was not absolutely clear, says Kyle Flack, an assistant professor at the University of Kentucky, who conducted the experiment as part of his graduate research. People’s resting metabolic rates had not changed during the study, he says, whichever group they had been in. Their activity monitors also showed few differences in how much or little they moved during the day. So the caloric compensation must have involved overeating, he says. But the volunteers did not think so. “Their food recall did not show differences” in how much they reported eating at the start and end of the study, Dr. Flack says. “I think they just did not realize that they were eating more,” he says. There probably also are complicated interconnections between exercise, appetite and people’s relationships to food that were not picked up during this study and can affect eating and weight, he says. He hopes to study those issues in future studies. But already, the results from this experiment are encouraging, if cautionary. “It looks like you can lose weight with exercise,” Dr. Flack says. But success may require more exertion of our bodies and will than we might hope, he adds. “Thirty minutes of exercise was not enough” in this study to overcome the natural drive to replace the calories we burn during a workout. “Sixty minutes of exercise was better,” he says. But even then, people replaced about a third of the calories they expended during exercise. “You still have to count calories and weigh portions” if you hope to use exercise to control your weight, he says. Correction :  An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated that study participants walked on a treadmill. While some used a treadmill, others used an elliptical machine or a stationary bicycle. 
Exercise vs. Standing? You Probably Need to Do Both Moderate exercise does different things to the body than incidental activities like standing up. Exercise alone is probably not enough for us to achieve and maintain good health. We must also try to sit less, according to a fascinating new study of the separate physiological effects that exercise and light, almost-incidental activities, such as standing up, can have on our bodies. By now, we all know that regular exercise is good for us. The United States  national exercise guidelines, which are based on a wealth of scientific evidence, recommend at least 150 minutes of moderate exercise each week in order to lengthen our life spans and reduce our risks of a variety of diseases. In practice, this recommendation translates into 30 minutes almost daily of exercise that should be brisk enough to raise our heart rates and make us gasp a bit for breath. But exercising 30 minutes a day leaves us plenty of time for other activities, the primary one of which (apart from sleeping) tends to be sitting. A typical office worker can easily log more than 10 or 11 hours a day in a chair, according to studies of how we spend our time. These long stretches of sitting have been associated with a variety of health concerns, including increased risks for diabetes, obesity and poor cholesterol profiles. But whether a single session of exercise most days can reduce or cancel out those risks or whether we also need to find ways to sit less has remained scientifically uncertain. So for the new study, which was published this month in Scientific Reports , researchers at Maastricht University in the Netherlands decided to ask several groups of men and women to upend their lives temporarily for science. Some of the 61 adults whom the scientists recruited were normal weight and generally healthy; others were overweight; and still others both overweight and diabetic. None exercised regularly. The scientists invited these men and women to the university performance lab and tested them for various markers of cardiac and metabolic health, including insulin resistance and cholesterol levels. Then the researchers had each volunteer complete three distinct, four-day sessions of living calculatedly exaggerated lifestyles. During one, the men and women sat for 14 hours a day, their chair time interrupted only by bathroom breaks.  During another of the four-day sessions, they substituted one hour of their sitting time with exercise, pedaling a stationary bicycle at a moderate pace for an hour. The other 13 hours, they were back in a chair. Finally, for the third of the sessions, they sat for about eight hours a day but spent the other five or six hours of their waking time standing or strolling about at a casual, meandering pace. The calories that they burned during these activities, whether cycling or standing and light walking, were about the same. After each four-day block, the scientists repeated the health tests from the start and then compared them. The results diverged in illuminating ways after each session. After four days of sitting nonstop, the men and women showed greater insulin resistance and undesirable changes in their cholesterol levels. They also had blood markers showing detrimental changes to their endothelial cells, which line our blood vessels, including our arteries; when those cells are unhealthy, the risk of cardiac disease rises. In effect, four days of uninterrupted sitting seemed to be undermining the volunteers’ metabolic and heart health, including among those who had no symptoms of metabolic problems at the start. But after four days that included moderate bicycling, the volunteers displayed enhanced endothelial cell health, compared to when they had sat nonstop. Their insulin sensitivity and cholesterol profiles were unchanged, though. On the other hand, insulin and cholesterol levels both were better after four days of standing or strolling for at least five hours a day, the scientists found. But the volunteers’ endothelial-cell health had not budged. The light activity seemed not to have affected that marker of heart health. Over all, the results suggest that exercise and standing up have distinct effects on the body, says Bernard Duvivier, a postdoctoral researcher at Maastricht University, who led the new study. Moderate exercise seems to hone endothelial and cardiac health, he says, probably in large part by increasing the flow of blood through blood vessels. Standing up, on the other hand, may have a more pronounced and positive impact on metabolism, he says, perhaps by increasing the number of muscular contractions that occur throughout the day. Busy muscles burn blood sugar for fuel, which helps to keep insulin levels steady, and release chemicals that can reduce bad cholesterol.  Of course, this study was small and quite short-term, with each session lasting only four days. Over a longer period of time, the biological impacts of both moderate exercise and less sitting would likely become broader and more encompassing. But even so, the findings are compelling, Dr. Duvivier says, especially for those of us who often are deskbound. “People should understand,” he says, “that only moderate exercise is not enough and it’s also necessary to reduce prolonged sitting.” 
It may seem like a contradiction, but more adults in the U.S. say they are exercising at the same time more of them are becoming obese. About 24 percent of adults last year said they exercise enough each week to meet government recommendations for both muscle strengthening and aerobic exercise, according to a large annual health survey. That was up from 21 percent in 2015. The same survey says 31 percent of adults indicated they were obese last year, up slightly. Another, more rigorous government study has also found adult obesity is inching up. So if more Americans are exercising, how can more also be getting fatter? Some experts think the findings may reflect two sets of people — the haves and have-nots of physical fitness, so to speak. "It's possible the people becoming more active are already normal weight," said John Jakicic, director of the University of Pittsburgh's Physical Activity and Weight Management Research Center. The numbers come from an in-person annual national survey that for more than 60 years has been an important gauge of U.S. health trends. Roughly 35,000 adults answer the survey every year, including questions about how often, how long and how vigorously they exercise in their leisure time. The survey gives a good sense of trends, but it's not perfect. People generally overstate how much they exercise, just as they overstate their height and lowball their weight, Jakicic said. Ten-year-old federal recommendations say adults should do weightlifting or other muscle-strengthening exercise at least twice a week. They also advise adults to do at least 75 minutes a week of high-intensity aerobic activity, such as running, or 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise, such as brisk walking, or a combination of the two. In a report being released Thursday, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention looked at survey responses from 2010 through 2015 and found that level of leisure-time exercise was more common in some states than others. Nearly a third of non-elderly adults in Colorado, Idaho, and New Hampshire met exercise guidelines. Only about one-seventh in Mississippi, Kentucky and South Carolina did. Higher levels of exercise were more common in people who were working than those who weren't, the study also found. Nationally, exercise levels were flat during the years covered by the CDC report. But more recent data show more adults said they were exercising at recommended levels in 2016 and 2017. It's not clear why, said Jena Shaw Tronieri, a University of Pennsylvania weight-loss expert. One possibility: Many adults exercise to manage stress, and the last two years have seen increasing political and social turmoil. "I don't know if that will explain the increase recently, but we know those situational factors are part of the context," she said. Of course, unhealthy eating has a lot to do with obesity. Research indicates that "a change in diet is needed to see any dent or reduction in obesity," said the CDC's Tainya Clarke, one of the authors of the report. ___ The Associated Press Health & Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute's Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content. 
Small amounts of exercise could have an outsize effect on happiness. According to a new review of research about good moods and physical activity, people who work out even once a week or for as little as 10 minutes a day tend to be more cheerful than those who never exercise. And any type of exercise may be helpful. The idea that moving can affect our moods is not new. Many of us would probably say that we feel less cranky or more relaxed after a jog or visit to the gym. Science would generally agree with us. A number of past studies have noted that physically active people have much lower risks of developing depression and anxiety than people who rarely move. But that research centered on the relationships between exercise and psychological problems like depression and anxiety. Fewer past studies explored links between physical activity and upbeat emotions, especially in people who already were psychologically healthy, and those studies often looked at a single age group or type of exercise. On their own, they do not tell us much about the amounts or types of exercise that might best lift our moods, or whether most of us might expect to find greater happiness with regular exercise or only certain groups of people. So for the new review, in The Journal of Happiness Studies , researchers at the University of Michigan decided to aggregate and analyze multiple past studies of working out and happiness. They began by combing research databases for relevant studies and wound up with 23 published since 1980. Most of those were observational, meaning that the scientists simply looked at a group of people, asking them how much they worked out and how happy they were. A few of the studies were experiments in which people started exercising and researchers measured their happiness before and after. The number of participants in any one study was often small, but together, they represented more than 500,000 people ranging in age from adolescents to the very old and covering a broad range of ethnic and socioeconomic groups. And for most of them, the Michigan researchers found, exercise was strongly linked to happiness. “Every one of the observational studies showed a beneficial relationship between being physically active and being happy,” says Weiyun Chen, an associate professor of kinesiology at the University of Michigan, who, with her graduate student Zhanjia Zhang, wrote the review. The type of exercise did not seem to matter. Some happy people walked or jogged. Others practiced yoga-style posing and stretching. And the amount of exercise needed to influence happiness was slight, Dr. Chen says. In several studies, people who worked out only once or twice a week said they felt much happier than those who never exercised. In other studies, 10 minutes a day of physical activity was linked with buoyant moods. But more movement generally contributed to greater happiness. If people exercised for at least 30 minutes on most days, which is the standard American and European recommendation for good health, Dr. Chen says, they were about 30 percent more likely to consider themselves happy than people who did not meet the guidelines. “I think the indications are strong that exercise can contribute to happiness and, while anything helps, a bit more is probably better,” she says. But because most of the studies in this review were observational, she says, it is not possible yet to establish whether exercise directly causes changes in happiness or if the two just happen to occur together often. It could be that happy people are more likely to take up exercise and continue with it than people who feel sad. In that case, exercise would not have helped to make people happy; rather, their happiness would have helped to make them exercisers. Happiness also is an inherently subjective, squishy concept. The studies analyzed in the review asked people how happy they felt. But one person’s happiness could be another’s relative gloom, making it difficult to generalize about how any of us might react, emotionally, to starting an exercise routine. And, of course, the review did not delve into how exercise could be influencing happiness. “There are indications that social factors could mediate the effects of exercise on happiness for some people,” Dr. Chen says. In other words, the social interactions that occur during an exercise class or trip to the gym might help to elevate people’s moods. Or exercise could more directly change the body, including the brain. “We know that exercise improves health,” Dr. Chen says, “and feeling healthier might make people feel happier.” Exercise might also remodel the brain, for example, by prompting the creation of new brain cells or inducing changes in brain chemicals, in ways that contribute to positive emotions. Dr. Chen hopes that future experiments will explore these issues. But for now, she says, “I think that we can safely say that people who exercise are probably going to be happier than people who don’t.” Correction :  An earlier version of this article misstated when the new review of research was published. It was in March, not last month. 
Just trying a H.I.I.T. workout for the first time may be a critical step in including high-intensity training as part of your everyday routine. Few people interested in fitness are unfamiliar with the concept of high-intensity interval training, or H.I.I.T., which involves very short, very strenuous bursts of exercise interspersed with periods of rest. But many people are intimidated to try such workouts. As my colleague Tara Parker-Pope reported recently , using a heart-rate monitor helped her overcome her fear of H.I.I.T. But a new study shows that for many, just trying an H.I.I.T. workout for the first time may be a critical step in including high-intensity training as part of your everyday routine. The study undercuts some widespread assumptions about the psychological effects of intense exercise and also indicates that short, hard workouts could be a practical alternative to other forms of exercise in part because we do not hate them. H.I.I.T. has gained considerable attention in recent years, thanks to experiments showing that even a few minutes a week of strenuous intervals improve aerobic fitness and other aspects of health as much as hours of jogging or moderate bicycle riding. But some scientists have argued that the potential physical benefits from intense training will be illusory if people do not complete the workouts. Their concerns are based on past research showing that if exercise is intense, most people report not liking it. But those studies primarily examined nonstop intense exercise, such as continuous, hard bicycling or running, and not interval training, which interrupts the strenuous exertion with rest periods. So for the new study, which was published in May in Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise , researchers from the University of British Columbia in Kelowna and McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, decided to ask a group of ordinary people to try a variety of workouts and see if they liked them. The researchers began by gathering 30 men and women who were inactive in general and had not tried interval training before. They brought them into the lab, tested their fitness and familiarized them with different measures of how they felt during exercise. One of these asked them to estimate the relative intensity of a workout on a scale of 1 to 10, while another required rating the pleasantness (if any) of a workout on a similar numeric scale. They then had each volunteer complete three workouts on separate days. During one, the participants rode a stationary bicycle for 45 minutes at a steady, moderate pace. During another, they tried standard high-intensity interval training, riding hard for one minute, resting for a minute, and repeating the sequence 10 times. For the last workout, they were introduced to super-high-intensity training, consisting of pedaling as hard as they possibly could for 30 seconds three times, with two minutes of rest between each grunting bout of all-out pedaling. Capitalizing on the rest periods between intervals, the researchers repeatedly asked the men and women to assess how they felt during their exertions and also, afterward, to rank each workout according to which had been most and least enjoyable. Then, in perhaps the most important element of the study, the scientists waved farewell to their volunteers, but asked them to keep logs of their physical activities for a month, to see if people would choose to continue any of the workouts on their own. To no one’s surprise, when the scientists tallied results, the cyclists proved to have unanimously reported less fatigue and more happiness during the moderate pedaling, especially if the researchers checked in near the end of either of the sessions of tiring intervals. But afterward, with the exercise behind them, people’s opinions shifted and almost all of the volunteers decided that, in retrospect, they had found the workouts almost equally enjoyable and would in fact rank the standard, high-intensity interval training as the most pleasant. About 80 percent of them also tried at least one session of interval training in the month after the experiment, although they completed more moderate workouts in that time. These findings indicate that intervals could be less onerous than many of us probably expect, says Matthew Stork, a doctoral student at the University of British Columbia who led the study. While perhaps not a ringing endorsement of the joys of strenuous exercise, the results also suggest that how you feel during a draining interval workout may not reflect how you will feel afterward, Mr. Stork says, and you might even find that you wish to repeat the hard workout again. But this study was small, of course, and involved only one supervised session of each workout. It cannot tell us whether everyone will develop similar emotional responses to intense training or whether our feelings about the exercise might change with experience or greater fitness. The study also reinforces the fundamental message about intervals, which is that they are hard and physically difficult, which some people will never enjoy. Still, Mr. Stork says, if you are pressed for time, brief interval sessions might offer a viable way to fit exercise into your life. “And you can’t know whether you will enjoy them or not,” he says, “until you try them.” 
If you have ever run a marathon, you know that the effort can cause elation, exhaustion, achy legs, blackened toenails and an overwhelming urge to eat. But it is unlikely to have made you vulnerable to colds or other illnesses afterward, according to a myth-busting new review of the latest science about immunity and endurance exercise. The review concludes that, contrary to widespread belief, a long, tiring workout or race can amplify immune responses, not suppress them. For decades, most researchers, coaches, athletes and athletes’ mothers have been convinced that a single long, hard distance race or other strenuous activity can leave the body so fatigued that it becomes unable to fight off cold viruses and other microbes that cause infections. Science supported this idea. Beginning in the 1980s, a number of studies of marathon and ultramarathon runners had found that many of them reported developing colds in the days and weeks immediately after their race. Their incidence of illness was much higher than among their nonrunning family members or the general population. With those findings as a backdrop, other scientists began to look at the working of the immune systems of athletes during and after draining events. Their research showed that changes occurred, some of them drastic. During an event such as a marathon, for instance, immune cells would begin to flood the bloodstreams of the athletes, apparently flushed there from other parts of the body as heart rates rose and blood sluiced more forcefully through various tissues. By the time the race ended, the runners’ bloodstreams would teem with extra immune cells. But within a few hours, the numbers of many such immune cells in the bloodstream would crash, researchers found, typically falling to levels far lower than before the event. The scientists interpreted these findings to mean that the runners’ physical exertions had killed large numbers of their immune cells and created what some researchers dubbed an “open window” of immune suppression that could allow opportunistic germs to creep in, unopposed. That idea became established doctrine in exercise science and sports. But recently, health researchers at the University of Bath in England grew skeptical. From an evolutionary standpoint, they reasoned, immune suppression after strenuous exercise made little sense. Early humans often had to chase prey or flee predators, opening themselves to injury. If they experienced a weakened immune response at the same time, they were in serious jeopardy. The researchers also suspected that scientific techniques developed since the 1980s might offer updated insights into what was going on inside the bodies of tired athletes. So for the new review, which was published this month in Frontiers in Immunology , they gathered and analyzed a wide variety of recent studies and used those findings to reconsider what exercise does to immunity in the short term. Their first conclusion was that athletes are lousy at identifying whether and why they are sniffling. The original 1980s studies had relied on runners’ self-reports of illness. But newer experiments that actually tested saliva showed that less than a third of marathon runners who thought they had caught a cold actually had. Statistically, their odds of becoming sick were about the same as for anyone else in the race’s host city. The athletes probably had misinterpreted allergies or short-term scratchiness in their airways after the race as a cold, says John Campbell, a professor at the University of Bath who was a co-author of the new review. Meanwhile, the researchers found, technically sophisticated new studies using animals undercut other aspects of the dogma about exercise and immunity. In these studies, mouse immune cells were dyed, allowing scientists to track their location. When the mice subsequently ran, many of the cells moved out of various tissues and into the bloodstream, as happens in people. But after exercise, these cells did not die off in massive numbers. Instead, the tracking revealed, they moved elsewhere, migrating to the animals’ guts or lungs, portions of the body that might be expected to need extra immune help after hard exercise. A few immune cells also flowed into the bone marrow, where they were thought to spark specialized stem cells into creating additional immune cells. In essence, the rodents’ immune systems had bolstered their defenses in vulnerable areas of the body after exercise by redirecting cells from the blood. Whether the same migrations take place inside of us is still unknown. “Live tracking of immune cells after exercise has not been done in people,” says James Turner, the review’s co-author and also a professor at the University of Bath. But he and Dr. Campbell suspect that this scenario would explain how immune-cell levels in marathoners’ blood rise back to normal within about 24 hours after a race. “The body can’t replace cells that quickly,” Dr. Turner says. So they must be returning to the blood from elsewhere. He and Dr. Campbell hope that future experiments will follow human athletes’ peripatetic immune cells after exercise and track how they influence health. But for now, the researchers would like their review to help to recalibrate our ideas about strenuous exercise and illness. “People should not be put off exercising for fear of it suppressing their immune system,” Dr. Campbell says. “Exercise is good for the immune system.” 
For people with coronary heart disease, losing weight will not prolong life, a new study reports, but increasing physical activity will. To their surprise, Norwegian researchers found that in some coronary heart disease patients — those of normal weight — weight loss actually increased the risk for death. The study, in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology , included 3,307 patients followed for an average of 16 years. There were 1,493 deaths. Lowering body mass index by more than 0.10 in a year was associated with a 30 percent increase in the risk for death, but only in those of normal weight at the start. Weight gain was not associated with mortality. Compared to patients who were inactive, those who did 150 minutes of moderate exercise a week reduced their risk by 19 percent. Those who exercised more than that had a 36 percent reduction in mortality. The lead author, Trine Moholdt, a research fellow at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, said that this is an observational study and it is possible that people who lost weight were sicker than others, which might explain their increased mortality. Still, she said, “Being active has large effects, and doing even a little bit is better than doing nothing. Weight loss is beneficial for overweight people, but exercise is even better.” 
Remaining physically active as we grow older could help to keep our muscles and immune systems robust, according to two inspiring new studies of older recreational cyclists. Together, the experiments add to growing evidence that some of our assumptions about aging may be outdated and we might have more control over the process than we think. Aging often seems inexorable and unvarying, and, in chronological terms, it is. The years mount at the same pace for each of us. But our bodies’ responses to the passage of time can differ. While most people become frail, a few remain spry. These differences recently prompted a group of British scientists to wonder whether our beliefs about what is normal and inevitable with physical aging might be limited or incorrect, and in particular, whether we might be ignoring the role of exercise. Exercise among middle-aged and older adults in the Western world is rare. By most estimates, only about 10 percent of people past the age of 65 work out regularly. So, our expectations about what is normal during aging are based on how growing older affects sedentary people. But the British scientists, many of them recreational athletes, suspected that exercise might have an impact on the trajectory of physical aging and, if so, alter our beliefs about what “normal” aging means. To test that possibility, they decided to seek out a group of older men and women who had remained physically active as they aged and found them among local recreational cyclists. The dozens of male and female riders they eventually recruited were between the ages of 55 and 79, had been cycling for decades, and still pedaled about 400 miles per month. None were competitive athletes. For their inaugural study of the riders , which was published in 2014, the scientists measured a broad range of the cyclists’ physical and cognitive abilities and compared them to those of sedentary older people and much younger men and women. The cyclists proved to have reflexes, memories, balance and metabolic profiles that more closely resembled those of 30-year-olds than of the sedentary older group. That analysis had left many questions about exercise and physical activity unanswered, however. So for the two new studies, which were both published in Aging Cell this month, the researchers decided to refocus their inquiries and look closely at muscles and T cells, a key infection-fighting component of our immune system. In most people, muscle health and immune response worsen after we arrive at middle age, with the effects accelerating decade by decade. But there had been hints in the first study’s data that the cyclists might be unusual in these regards. So for one of the new studies , the researchers turned to muscle tissue that already had been biopsied from the legs of 90 of the riders. They wanted to compare various markers of muscle health and function across the riders’ age span. If the muscles of riders in their 70s resembled those of riders in their 50s, the scientists reasoned, then their physical activity most likely had altered and slowed the supposedly “normal” arc of muscular decline. At the same time, other scientists delved into the riders’ immune systems , drawing blood from them, as well as from a group of sedentary older people and another of healthy young adults. The two sets of scientists then dove into their data and both concluded that older cyclists are not like most of the rest of us. They are healthier. They are, biologically, younger. Their muscles generally retained their size, fiber composition and other markers of good health across the decades, with those riders who covered the most mileage each month displaying the healthiest muscles, whatever their age. The impacts on riders’ immune system also were marked. In the older sedentary people, the output of new T cells from the thymus glands was low. The inactive older peoples’ thymus glands also were atrophied, compared to those of the younger group. The aging cyclists, on the other hand, had almost as many new T cells in their blood as did the young people. Those who exercised also showed high levels of other immune cells that help to prevent autoimmune reactions and of a hormone that protects the thymus against shrinkage. The researchers theorize that the results of the two studies are interrelated. Muscles are one of the sources of the hormone that protects the thymus. “So more muscle means more of that hormone,” says Janet Lord, the director of the Institute of Inflammation and Aging at the University of Birmingham, who was a co-author of both studies. The older cyclists’ immune systems were not impervious to aging, of course. Many of their existing T cells showed signs of senescence, which means that they had grown feeble and were unlikely to fight infections well anymore. The results also are limited to recreational British cyclists. They cannot tell us if other types and amounts of physical activity would necessarily have the same effects or whether someone could begin exercising at, say, age 60 and expect to benefit to the same extent as someone who has exercised lifelong. But even with those caveats, Dr. Lord says, “the message of these studies is that much of what we previously thought of as inevitable in aging is in fact preventable.” 
Exercise may help the brain to build durable memories, through good times and bad. Stress and adversity weaken the brain’s ability to learn and retain information, earlier research has found. But according to a remarkable new neurological study in mice, regular exercise can counteract those effects by bolstering communication between brain cells. Memory has long been considered a biological enigma, a medley of mental ephemera that has some basis in material existence. Memories are coded into brain cells in the hippocampus, the brain’s memory center. If our memories were not written into those cells, they would not be available for later, long-term recall, and every brain would be like that of Dory, the memory-challenged fish in “Finding Nemo.” But representations of experience are extremely complex, and aspects of most memories must be spread across multiple brain cells, neuroscientists have determined. These cells must be able to connect with one another, so that the memory, as a whole, stays intact. The connections between neurons, known as synapses, are composed of electrical and chemical signals that move from cell to cell, like notes passed in class. The signals can be relatively weak and sporadic or flow with vigor and frequency. In general, the stronger the messages between neurons, the sturdier and more permanent the memories they hold. Neuroscientists have known for some time that the potency of our synapses depends to some degree on how we live our lives. Lack of sleep, alcohol, diet and other aspects of our lifestyles, especially stress, may dampen the flow of messages between brain cells, while practice fortifies it. Repeat an action and the signals between the cells maintaining the memory of that action can strengthen. That is learning. There also have been hints that exercise might affect synapses in the hippocampus. Exercise has been shown in many studies to improve learning and memory. But only a few past animal studies have closely tracked changes to synapses after exercise and none looked simultaneously at stress, leaving the results unrepresentative of actual life, which always contains some amount of stress. So, for the new study, which was published this month in Neurobiology of Learning and Memory , researchers at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, gathered healthy, male mice. (They plan similar future studies with female mice.) They divided the animals into groups. Some, as a control, continued with their normal rodent lives. Others began running at will on wheels in their cages; mice seem to enjoy running and these eagerly covered about three miles a day. After a month, some of the sedentary animals were exposed to three days of stressful experiences. These mostly involved some type of mild restraint, which makes prey animals like mice understandably anxious. The researchers were trying to simulate relatively chronic stress with the animals, somewhat like what most of us might feel with ongoing work pressures or other anxieties. Some of the runners were also restrained and stressed. Then, to see if any changes to the animals’ synapses would be reflected in their lived experience, the researchers had some mice from each group learn a maze with a treat in one hidden corner. Finally, the researchers looked microscopically at the operations of the synapses joining the neurons in the animals’ hippocampi. By electrically stimulating some of the isolated cells, they could see how many and what types of messages jumped between them. It was immediately clear that three days of chronic stress had reduced the effectiveness of the synapses in the stressed-out, sedentary animals, compared to those from the control mice. Their intracellular connections were much weaker. The unstressed runners, on the other hand, now had the strongest, busiest synapses, suggesting that their ability to learn and remember would be higher than in the other animals. Perhaps most interesting, the animals that had run and also experienced chronic stress had synapses that resembled those from the normal, unstressed control group. They were not as strong as those from the never-stressed runners but much stronger than those from the animals that had been stressed but not exercised. Behaviorally, the runners, stressed or not, also learned the location of the treats in the maze more quickly than the sedentary animals did, and remembered it more rapidly and accurately several weeks later. Over all, it seems that exercise had improved the animals’ memories, even in the face of stress, by bulking up their synapses and buffering the negative effects that stress otherwise would have had on those neural connections, says Roxanne Miller, who led the study as part of her doctoral research at B.Y.U. It is not yet clear, though, she says, how exercise changed the animals’ synapses at a molecular level. She and her colleagues did find increases in the activity of certain genes and the levels of some proteins in the brains of the runners that could have contributed to the changes in their synapses, she says. But far more research is needed into that issue, as well as into whether other forms of exercise, such as resistance training or gentle walking, would have comparable effects, she says. And of course, mice are not people, and it is impossible to know if the same changes occur in our synapses when we exercise. But even so, the results do seem to offer one more reason being physically active “is a very good idea,” Dr. Miller says.  
Exercise may change the composition and activity of the trillions of microbes in our guts in ways that could improve our health and metabolisms over time, a new study finds. The results provide novel insights into how exercise can affect even those portions of our bodies that seem uninvolved in workouts, perhaps providing another nudge to stick with our exercise resolutions this year. I think we all have heard by now that each of us contains a pulsating little universe of bacteria within our guts. This microbiome includes countless different species of microbes in varying proportions that interact, compete and busily release various substances that are implicated in weight control, inflammation, immune responses and many other aspects of health throughout our bodies. In broad terms, our microbiomes tend to be relatively stable, most studies show. But our microbiomes can change as our lifestyles do. Diet clearly affects the makeup of a person’s microbiome, as do illness, certain drugs, how much we weigh and other factors. Exercise also has been associated with variations in the microbiome. Past studies have shown that endurance athletes tend to have a somewhat different collection of microbes within their intestines than sedentary people do, especially if the athletes are lean and the sedentary people are not. But those studies have been associational and could not show whether exercise actually altered microbes or how any microbial changes might later affect health. So for the new study, which was published in November in Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise , scientists from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign decided to track the guts of people who undertook an unfamiliar exercise routine. The study was designed, in fact, as a follow-up to an earlier, interesting animal study by the same scientists. In that work, the researchers had allowed some lab mice to run and others to sit around for most of their adult lives. Gut material from the mice was then transplanted into animals that had been bred to be germ-free, so that their guts would easily incorporate these new tribes of bacteria. After the animals’ microbiomes were established, the scientists exposed the mice to a substance that can cause tissue irritation and inflammation in the colon. The scientists found that the animals with gut bugs from the runners were better able to resist and heal tissue damage and tamp down inflammation than those whose microbes had come from sedentary mice. Now the scientists wished to see if exercise would likewise affect the functioning of microbes in people. They began by recruiting 32 men and women who did not exercise. About half were obese and the rest of normal weight. The scientists took blood and fecal samples and tested everyone’s aerobic fitness. Then they had the men and women begin supervised workouts, during which their efforts increased over time from about 30 minutes of easy walking or cycling to about an hour of vigorous jogging or pedaling three times per week. The volunteers were asked not to change their normal diets. After six weeks, the scientists collected more samples and retested everyone, and then asked the volunteers to stop exercising altogether. Six weeks later, the tests were once again repeated. The subsequent analysis showed that the volunteers’ gut bugs had changed throughout the experiment, with some increasing in numbers and others declining. The researchers also found changes in the operations of many microbes’ genes. Some of those genes were working harder now, while others had grown silent. Most of these changes were not shared from one person to the next. Everyone’s gut responded uniquely to exercise. But there were some similarities, the researchers found. In particular, they noted widespread increases in certain microbes that can help to produce substances called short-chain fatty acids. These fatty acids are believed to aid in reducing inflammation in the gut and the rest of the body. They also work to fight insulin resistance, a precursor to diabetes, and otherwise bolster our metabolisms. Most of the volunteers had larger concentrations of these short-chain fatty acids in their intestines after exercise, along with the microbes that produce them. These increases were greatest, though, among the volunteers who had begun the experiment lean compared to those who were obese, the scientists found. And perhaps not surprisingly, almost all of the changes in people’s guts dissipated after six weeks of not exercising. By and large, their microbiomes reverted to what they had been at the study’s start. Still, the study’s overall results suggest that even a few weeks of exercise can alter the makeup and function of people’s microbiomes, says Jeffrey Woods, a professor of kinesiology and community health at the University of Illinois who conducted the study, along with his doctoral student Jacob Allen (now a postdoctoral researcher at Ohio State University) and others. In theory, Dr. Woods continues, these changes could contribute to some of the broader health benefits of exercise, such as its ability to reduce inflammation throughout the body. “But more studies need to be done to prove this,” he says. He also hopes that future research can explain why the obese volunteers showed smaller gains in their fatty-acid producing microbes than the leaner men and women. Additional study could also help to determine whether and how people’s microbiomes might continue to change if they exercise for longer than six weeks — a goal that all of us, of course, have resolved to do in the coming year, right? 
Exercise broadly improves our memories and thinking skills, according to a wealth of science . The evidence supporting similar benefits from so-called brain training has been much iffier, however, with most people performing better only on the specific types of games or tasks practiced in the program. But an interesting new study published in the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience suggests that combining intense exercise and brain training might, over time, amplify the benefits of both for the brain, even in people whose minds already are working well. Most of us are blissfully unaware of the complexity of our brain’s memory systems. Memories come in many different types, including detailed recollections of faces and objects and how they differ from similar faces and objects, as well as separate memories about where and when we last saw those things. These remembrances are created and stored throughout the hippocampus, our brain’s primary memory center. Past studies with animals show that exercise prompts the creation of many new brain cells in the hippocampus, presumably providing the raw materials — the blank canvas — onto which strong, new memories can be written and allowing for improvements in many types of memory after exercise. Brain-training programs typically have had more limited effects. Research in people suggests that they often improve only the specific type of memory and thinking tested. So people who practice crossword puzzles may get better at completing crossword puzzles, but they may not get better at remembering where they last put their wallets. Interestingly, however, some studies in animals have found that learning and thinking of any type, such as occurs during brain training, can improve the survival and functioning of young brain cells. So scientists at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, began to wonder recently whether brain training and exercise training might be complementary, with exercise prompting the creation of baby neurons that brain training would then strengthen. To find out, the researchers decided to study a group of healthy, young college students, a group that would be expected to have robust and vigorous memories. If an experimental program resulted in better memories in these people, the scientists reasoned, it should also have implications for those of us whose aging memories might be starting to stutter and fade. They eventually recruited 95 young men and women, none of whom currently exercised. They drew blood, checked the volunteers’ aerobic fitness, and had them complete a series of memory tests. Then they randomly sorted them into three groups. One, as a control, was asked to continue with their normal lives. Another began exercising, reporting to the university’s physiology lab three times a week for 20 minutes of supervised, high-intensity interval training on stationary bicycles. The researchers chose intense intervals because they provide a “strong physical stimulus” which should rapidly raise the fitness of the young people, says Jennifer Heisz, an assistant professor at McMaster University who led the study. The third group undertook the same cycling program but with the addition of 20 minutes of computerized brain training before or after the workouts. This particular mental training consisted of memorizing faces that were similar to one another and then matching the correct faces as they appeared randomly on a computer screen. This program should improve the ability to dial in the details of the human face, an important but narrow type of memory. The groups continued their assigned program for six weeks, and then repeated their original tests of fitness and memory. In general, the young people who had exercised, whether they also brain trained or not, were then more physically fit than those in the control group. They also, for the most part, performed better on memory tests. And those improvements spanned different types of memory, including the ability to rapidly differentiate among pictures of objects that looked similar, a skill not practiced in the brain-training group. These enhancements in memory were most striking among the volunteers whose fitness had also improved the most, especially if they also practiced brain training. In effect, more fitness resulted in stronger memories, Dr. Heisz says, with the brain training adding to that effect, even for a type of memory that was not part of the training. But the gains were not universal, the researchers found. Some of the young people in both exercise groups barely added to their aerobic fitness and also had the skimpiest improvements in memory. For them, Dr. Heisz and her colleagues suspect, the interval training was probably too intense a form of exercise and may have caused their bodies to produce large amounts of stress hormones, which then affected how well their bodies and brains responded to the activity. “It’s possible that they would have developed a better response with different and perhaps more-moderate exercise,” she says. She and her colleagues plan soon to study the effects of various types and amounts of exercise and brain training on memory, including in people who are older. They also hope to follow people for longer periods of time to see whether the brain benefits linger, grow or stall. But for now, the study’s findings suggest that exercising both our bodies and minds may provide the greatest boost to our memories, she says. And the effort does not need to be formal or complicated, she adds. “I would suggest memorizing the details of a painting or landscape” — or perhaps a loved one’s face — before or after each workout, she says. It could provide broader memory benefits all around. 
Robert Marchand, age 105, in January 2017 in his bid to beat his record for distance cycled in an hour. By  Gretchen Reynolds Dec. 27, 2017 The overarching message of this year’s exercise-related science was that physical activity, in almost any form and amount, changes the arc of our lives. But much of this research also hinted that there may be something unique about pushing yourself at least a little extra that alters and ramps up the benefits of exercise, beginning deep within our cells. Oh, and several studies also helpfully told us that hot baths are a fine idea for those of us who work out, even if the weather is warm. But intensity was the theme of 2017. One of the first studies I wrote about this year detailed the career and physiology of Robert Marchand, a diminutive French centenarian who took up competitive cycling as a retiree and began setting age-group records. But after a physiologist revamped his once-leisurely training, adding some strenuous pedaling, Mr. Marchand decisively bettered his own records and, at the age of 103, set a new world mark for the most miles pedaled in an hour by a centenarian. His efforts help to belie a number of entrenched beliefs about older people, including that physical performance and aerobic capacity inevitably decline with age and that intense exercise is inadvisable, if not impossible, for the elderly. Other studies this year reinforced the notion that age need not be a deterrent to hard exercise and that such workouts could be key to healthy aging. An animal study that I wrote about in July , for instance, found that frail, elderly mice were capable of completing brief spurts of high-intensity running on little treadmills, if the treadmill’s pace were adjusted to each mouse’s individual fitness level. After four months of this kind of training, the exercised animals were stronger and more aerobically fit than other mice of the same age, and few remained physically frail. Perhaps most striking, “the animals had tolerated the high-intensity interval training well,” one of the scientists who conducted the study told me. But of course, mice are not people. So it was another study this year that to my mind provided the most persuasive evidence that strenuous exercise alters how we age. In that study, which I wrote about in March (which became my most popular column this year), scientists at the Mayo Clinic compared differences in gene expression inside muscle cells after younger and older people had completed various types of workouts. The greatest differences were seen in the operations of genes after people had practiced high-intensity interval training for 12 weeks. In younger people who exercised this way, almost 275 genes were firing differently now than they had been before the exercise. But in people older than 64, more than 400 genes were working differently now and many of those genes are known to be related to the health and aging of cells. In effect, the intense exercise seemed to be changing muscle cells in ways that theoretically could affect biological aging. 
At this point, I should probably pause and explain that intensity in exercise is a relative concept. The word intense can seem daunting, but in practice, it simply means physical activity that is not a cinch for you. For research purposes, intensity is based on percentages of someone’s heart rate maximum. But you and I can ignore these technicalities and pay attention to how we feel. Many scientists have told me that exercise is considered easy if you can talk and sing while participating in it. During relatively moderate exercise, singing becomes difficult. And during intense exercise, you will find it difficult to speak without gasping. But, again, intensity is relative. If you have barely exercised in recent years, five minutes of climbing stairs will constitute an intense — and effective — workout. If, on the other hand, you regularly stroll during the week, you might consider increasing the pace of those walks for a few minutes at a time, until you no longer can easily converse. The latest science suggests that your cells will thank you. And afterward, other science says, reward yourself with a warm soak. Several ingratiating studies this year indicated that luxuriating in warm water aids in recovery from strenuous exercise and also, surprisingly, helps us to acclimate to hot-weather workouts . But as always, the most compelling exercise-related research this year reminded us that activity of any kind is essential for human well-being. One of my favorite studies of 2017 found that people reported feeling happiest during the day when they had been up and moving compared to when they had remained seated and still. Another memorable study concluded that, statistically, an hour spent running could add about seven hours to our life spans. These gains are not infinite. They seem to be capped at about three years of added life for people who run regularly. How to Start Running Running is a great way to get fit, feel better and even form new relationships with other runners. Starting a new running habit doesn’t have to be hard — all it takes is a comfortable pair of shoes and a willingness to move a little or a lot, all at your own pace. But the results have inspired me. I trained for and ran a half marathon in 2017 and will run another in 2018. I am not fast. But I aim to be persistent. If Mr. Marchand can gain fitness and speed after turning 100, why should not those of us with still a half-century or more to spare? Happy New Year, everyone. 
Exercise could help to make your fat tissue healthier, which, hear me out, is a good thing. According to a timely new study, a single session of exercise may change the molecular workings of fat tissue in ways that, over time, should improve metabolic health. This finding has particular relevance during the holidays, when, despite our best intentions, so many of us add to our fat stores. Exercise might make these annual bacchanals less metabolically damaging than otherwise. Most of us probably think of our fat tissue as inert and undesirable. But our fat is, in fact, a busy and necessary tissue, producing and sending out multiple biochemical signals that affect biological operations throughout the body. Fat tissue’s most important responsibility, however, is to securely store fat, and we should hope that it performs this function well. Provocative recent research in both animals and people has found that, if a person’s or animal’s fat tissue is relatively leaky, allowing fatty acids to ooze into the bloodstream, those roving fat blobs can accumulate in other tissues, particularly the muscles and liver. Once there, they contribute to the development of insulin resistance, a serious metabolic condition that often leads to diabetes. In a study published earlier this year, for instance, scientists from the University of Michigan and elsewhere found that if overweight men and women had low levels of fatty acids in their bloodstream, they also were metabolically healthier than other overweight adults. Even more interesting, they generally also had healthy fat, the scientists found, with biopsies showing less inflammation and scarring than in the fat from other overweight men and women. (This fat was subcutaneous, meaning it came from just beneath the skin.) Presumably, the scientists speculated, this robust fat was leaking less than the frailer variety. But that study did not examine why some people had healthier fat than others and whether the condition of anyone’s fat tissue might be changed. So for the new study, which was published last month in the Journal of Applied Physiology , the same group of scientists began to consider exercise. Exercise, of course, is well known to affect the amount of fat we store, since muscles use fatty acids as fuel. Exercise also is believed to prompt small amounts of white fat to transform into brown fat, a particularly desirable form of fat that burns a lot of calories. But it has not been clear whether exercise directly alters the health of white fat tissue. To find out, the researchers first gathered 20 men and women who were overweight but did not have insulin resistance. Eight of them exercised regularly. The others had been sedentary. The researchers tested their volunteers’ body compositions and took fat samples. Then they had each volunteer exercise on a treadmill or stationary bike for an hour at a moderately tiring pace. An hour later, the scientists repeated the fat biopsies. Examining the various tissues microscopically afterward, the researchers found several tantalizing differences. In almost all of the volunteers, the fat tissue after exercise showed greater amounts of a protein that is known to contribute to the development of more blood vessels. This change could be important over time, says Jeffrey Horowitz, a professor of movement science at the University of Michigan School of Kinesiology who conducted the experiment with Douglas Van Pelt (now a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Kentucky) and others. “More blood vessels in tissue means greater blood flow,” he says, with augmented delivery of oxygen and nutrients and better overall tissue health. Interestingly, the fat tissue from those volunteers who regularly exercised also showed a small but meaningful increase in genetic activity related to blood vessel proliferation, suggesting that their tissue was more primed than that from the sedentary volunteers to start creating additional blood flow. Their fat tissue also showed a slight increase in the gene expression of a substance that helps to reduce inflammation. These alterations were not enormous, Dr. Horowitz says. They were subtle. But they occurred consistently and after a single session of exercise, he points out, and might, with continued exercise, be expected to improve fat health over time. This study was small, however, and very short-term and did not look at whether other amounts or types of exercise would have comparable effects within fat. It also did not measure whether exercise actually changed the amounts of fat in the bloodstream and, since the volunteers were overweight, cannot tell us whether the effects would be comparable in people whose weight was normal. Perhaps most fundamentally, the study concentrated on how to make our fat’s health rise when most of us would prefer that its quantity decline. Dr. Horowitz understands. “There is no doubt that the best thing for metabolic health is to lose weight.” But at this time of year, he says, when fat gain is common, a brisk walk or jog might make this added fat healthier and more stable, and the broader effects on our bodies a little less concerning. 
For most of us, temptations are everywhere, from the dessert buffet to the online shoe boutique. But a new study suggests that exercise might be a simple if unexpected way to increase our willpower and perhaps help us to avoid making impulsive choices that we will later regret. Self-control is one of those concepts that we all recognize and applaud but do not necessarily practice. It requires forgoing things that entice us, which, let’s face it, is not fun. On the other hand, lack of self-control can be consequential for health and well-being, often contributing to problems like weight gain, depression or money woes. Given these impacts, scientists and therapists have been interested in finding ways to increase people’s self-restraint. Various types of behavioral therapies and counseling have shown promise. But such techniques typically require professional assistance and have for the most part been used to treat people with abnormally high levels of impulsiveness. There have been few scientifically validated options available to help those of us who might want to be just a little better at resisting our more devilish urges. So for the new study, which was published recently in Behavior Modification , a group of researchers at the University of Kansas in Lawrence began wondering about exercise. Exercise is known to have considerable psychological effects. It can raise moods, for example, and expand people’s sense of what they are capable of doing. So perhaps, the researchers speculated, exercise might alter how well people can control their impulses. To find out, the scientists decided first to mount a tiny pilot study, involving only four men and women. These volunteers, who had been sedentary and overweight, were told they would be taking part in an exercise program to get them ready to complete a 5K race, and that the study would examine some of the effects of the training, including psychological impacts. The volunteers began by completing a number of questionnaires, including one that quantified their “delay discounting,” a measure that psychologists use to assess someone’s ability to put off pleasures now for greater enjoyments in the future. It tests, for instance, whether a person would choose to accept $5 today or $15 a week from now. The delay-discounting questionnaire is generally accepted in research circles as a valid measure of someone’s self-control. The volunteers then undertook a two-month walking and jogging regimen, meeting three times a week for 45 minutes with the researchers, who coached them through the sessions, urging them to maintain a pace that felt difficult but sustainable. Each week the men and women also repeated the questionnaires. Finally, a month after the formal training had ended, the volunteers returned to the university for one more round of testing. (Later, two of them also ran 5K races.) The results were intriguing, the researchers felt. Three of the four participants had developed significantly greater self-control, according to their delay-discounting answers, and maintained those gains a month after the formal training had ended. But one volunteer, who had missed multiple sessions, showed no changes in impulsivity. A four-person study is too small to be meaningful, though, so the researchers next repeated the experiment with 12 women of varying ages, weights and fitness levels. The results were almost identical to those in the pilot study. Most of the women gained a notable degree of self-control, based on their questionnaires, after completing the walking and jogging program. (In this experiment, they were told they were training for better fitness.) But the increases were proportional; the more sessions a woman attended or the more her average jogging pace increased, the greater the improvement in her delay-discounting score. These gains lingered a month after the training had ended, although most of the women had tapered off their exercise routines by then. The upshot of these results would seem to be that exercise could be a simple way to help people shore up their self-restraint, says Michael Sofis, a doctoral candidate in applied behavioral science at the University of Kansas who led the study. These two experiments cannot tell us, though, how exercise helps us to ignore a cupcake’s allure. But Mr. Sofis says that many past studies have concluded that regular exercise alters the workings of portions of the brain involved in higher-level thinking and decision-making, which, in turn, play important roles in impulse control. Exercise also may have more abstract psychological impacts on our sense of self-control, he says. It is, for many of us, a concentrated form of delayed gratification. Exerting ourselves during a workout is not always immediately pleasurable. But it can feel marvelous afterward to know that we managed to keep going, a sensation that could spill over into later decision-making. Of course, with a total of only 16 participants, these experiments remained small-scale and limited, relying on a fundamentally artificial, mathematical measure of self-control. The scientists did not, for example, track whether the volunteers became less impulsive in their actual daily lives. Mr. Sofis and his colleagues hope to conduct follow-up studies that will look at the real-world impacts of exercise on self-control. But for now, he says, these results suggest that normal people “can change and improve their self-control with regular physical activity.” 
Some types of exercise may be better than others at blunting appetite and potentially aiding in weight management, according to an interesting new study of workouts and hunger. It finds that pushing yourself during exercise affects appetite, sometimes in surprising ways. As anyone who has begun an exercise program knows, the relationships between exercise, appetite, weight control and hunger are complex and often counterintuitive. The arithmetic involved seems straightforward. You burn calories during exercise and, over time, should drop pounds. But the reality is more vexing. In both scientific studies and the world inhabited by the rest of us, most people who start exercising lose fewer pounds than would be expected, given the number of calories they are burning during workouts. Many people even gain weight. The problem with exercise as a weight-loss strategy seems to be in large part that it can make you hungry, and many of us wind up consuming more calories after a workout than we torched during it, a biological response that has led some experts and frustrated exercisers to conclude that exercise by itself — without strict calorie reduction — is useless for shedding pounds. But much of the past research into exercise and appetite has concentrated on walking or other types of relatively short or light activities. Some scientists have begun to wonder whether exercise that was physically taxing, either because it was prolonged or intense, might affect appetite differently than more easeful exercise. So for the new study, which was published recently in the Journal of Endocrinology , scientists from Loughborough University in Britain and other institutions who have been studying exercise and appetite for years recruited 16 healthy, fit young men. (They did not include women because this was a small, pilot study, the authors say, and controlling for the effects of women’s menstrual cycles would have been difficult.) They separated the men into two groups, each of which would concentrate on one element of exercise. The first group focused on intensity. To accomplish this, the scientists had the men visit the university’s performance lab on three separate occasions. During one, they sat quietly for several hours. During another, they ran on a treadmill at an easy jog, with their heart rates hovering at about 50 percent of their maximum capacity, for 55 minutes, until they had burned about 600 calories. On the final visit, they ran at a much more vigorous pace, around 75 percent of heart rate capacity, for 36 minutes, until they had again burned about 600 calories. Throughout their workouts and for an additional few hours, the scientists drew blood to check for levels of a particular hormone, acylated ghrelin, that is thought to influence appetite. Generally, when acylated ghrelin levels rise, so does hunger. They also asked the men how hungry they felt. Meanwhile, the scientists performed the same tasks with the second group of volunteers. But these men’s workouts emphasized length. So, one day they ran for 45 minutes at a steady pace and on another, strode at the same pace, but for 90 minutes. During a final visit, they sat. Then the scientists compared numbers. In general, exercise had lowered the men’s levels of acylated ghrelin, compared to when they had sat continuously. The effects were especially pronounced when the exercise had been intense or long. Vigorous running had blunted acylated ghrelin production more than gentler jogging and longer runs more than briefer ones. The effects also had lingered longest when the exercise had been most protracted. More than an hour after their 90-minute run, most of the men’s acylated ghrelin levels remained suppressed. Interestingly, the men’s subjective feelings of hunger had also been affected, but not in precisely the same fashion. After the 90-minute run, the men reported feeling less hungry than when they had sat around the lab, even an hour and a half later. But after the short, intense workout, the volunteers soon felt peckish, despite still having low levels of acylated ghrelin in their blood. Over all, these findings reveal that our appetites certainly are strange, influenced by many factors besides exercise and acylated ghrelin levels. But the results also intimate that if we hope to have workouts reduce our appetite, we may wish to increase the intensity or, even more, the duration of each session. Of course, this study was small and looked only at young men in good shape, says David Stensel, a professor of exercise metabolism at Loughborough University who oversaw the experiments. It also did not follow them to see whether, in the hours after their workouts, they replaced the calories they had burned. In the future, the researchers hope to mount longer-term studies that include women, as well as older, sedentary and overweight people, to better understand how different types of exercise influence each group’s hormones and hunger and to tease out the many physiological mechanisms involved. But in the meantime, Dr. Stensel points out, we should exercise, whether or not the activity makes us thin. “There are so many other reasons, irrespective of the effects on appetite, why exercise benefits health,” he says. 
Twice a week, often between video calls or meetings, Andrew Lowenthal takes a break from work to open an app on his phone that helps him focus on his breathing. The payoff? Better stress management, clearer thinking at work and — to Mr. Lowenthal’s surprise — more strength and power in the gym. “It’s such a fundamental part of being human but not something that we think about often,” Mr. Lowenthal said about his breathwork. As the executive director of Out in Tech , a Manhattan-based nonprofit, Mr. Lowenthal, 33, typically spends three to 10 minutes on an app created by Inscape , a New York meditation studio. He inhales, holding and exhaling his breath for various lengths of time according to prompts. Mr. Lowenthal said that he now exercises more regularly and takes care of himself better because of his breathing exercises. “It definitely helps me with my endurance,” he said. Long a key part of meditation and some kinds of yoga, breathwork is now becoming a discipline in its own right, with proponents offering classes, one-on-one sessions and apps dedicated to the practice. And whereas the focus has predominantly been on the mental and psychological benefits of breathwork, fitness industry professionals are increasingly saying that it can also enhance athletic performance or speed muscular recovery after a workout. Mindbodygreen , a wellness-focused media company that has published articles on breathwork, has noted an uptick in interest in the subject from its audience — in particular from “people who are thinking meditation is too woo-woo,” said a company co-founder, Colleen Wachob. “It’s a slightly different cohort that’s looking for a shortcut or hack and that’s more performance- or science-driven,” she said. Image Amanda Baker, a meditation student at Inscape. Credit Kholood Eid for The New York Times It has been long recognized that deep, controlled breathing can calm someone having an anxiety attack or help anyone in need of a little more stress-relief and mental clarity. Hillary Clinton, for example, has talked about using alternate side nostril breathing to help her relax while on the 2016 presidential campaign trail. But what’s new is that scientists have found a physical link between breathing and what they call “emotionality.” A study published last March in Science showed a direct anatomical link between the parts of the brain that control voluntary breathing and the parts that control emotionality. Altering the activity of this connection changed how aroused, alert or calm mice were. “It’s an important finding because it shows that there is a causality between the two,” said Andrew D. Huberman, a professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford University. In his lab at Stanford, Dr. Huberman is doing research on breathing and how it impacts emotional states. He’s also developing an app with Brian MacKenzie, a strength and conditioning coach in San Mateo Hills, Calif. The goal of the app will be to customize breathwork for people by giving them a simple inhale-and-exhale test and incorporating other data provided by those who sign up for it. “Breathwork can be thought of as exercise in that, if done correctly, has immediate benefits — physical, emotional and cognitive — but breathwork also has longer-term benefits if you do it regularly,” Dr. Huberman said. “The idea is that people can alter and strengthen the neural pathways that link breathing with emotion regulation centers in the brain, which can help them feel calmer and more alert, and sleep better, depending on the protocols they use.” It can also make you a better athlete. Mr. MacKenzie, who is the co-author of three sports-related books including “Unbreakable Runner,” teaches his clients how to use nasal breathing to optimize their athletic performance and be more “metabolically efficient.” Breathing through the nose activates the parasympathetic nervous system, which helps people remain calm and alert, improves their peripheral vision and encourages them to maintain better posture and mechanics, which results in fewer injuries, Mr. Mackenzie said. All of these findings are not lost on Equinox, the chain of high-end gyms. Instructors started getting basic training in breathwork about two years ago when the company introduced a class called HeadStrong , which blends a high-intensity workout with so-called mindful movement and concludes with breathing. “I do see breathwork becoming as ubiquitous for recovery as foam rolling or stretching,” said Michael Gervais, Equinox’s senior manager of group fitness talent. He mentioned one study that shows a link between parasympathetic nervous activity, which is activated by breathwork, and recovery status after an intense workout. Khajak Keledjian, founder and former C.E.O. of Intermix and the founder of Inscape, credits meditation , which he does twice daily, for reducing stress and improving his sleep and energy levels. He’s also noticed that he has an easier time breathing when he goes on challenging hikes. “According to heart-rate standards,” he said, “my endurance and stamina is at the level of an athlete.” 
Even a single workout could be good for the heart. That’s the conclusion of a fascinating new study in mice that found that 30 minutes on a treadmill affects gene activity within cardiac cells in ways that, over the long haul, could slow the aging of the animals’ hearts. Although the study involved mice, the results may help to explain just how, at a cellular level, exercise improves heart health in people as well. There’s no question that, in general, physical activity is good for hearts. Many studies have found that people who regularly exercise are much less likely to develop or die from cardiac disease than people who are sedentary. Still, researchers have remained puzzled about just how exercise alters hearts for the better. Exercise is known to improve our blood pressure, pulse rate and cholesterol profiles, all of which are associated with better cardiac health. But many scientists who study the links between exercise and heart health have pointed out that these changes, considered together, explain only about half of the reported statistical reductions in cardiac disease and death. Other, more complex physiological modifications must simultaneously be taking place within the heart itself during and after exercise, these researchers have speculated. And recently, researchers at the University of Maryland in College Park and other institutions have begun to wonder whether some of these changes might involve telomeres. Telomeres are tiny caps on the ends of chromosomes, often compared to the tips of shoelaces, which help to prevent fraying and damage to our DNA. Young cells have relatively long telomeres. As a cell ages or undergoes significant stress, its telomeres shorten. If they become too abbreviated, the cell stops working well or dies. But while shorter telomeres indicate biologically older cells, the process is not strictly chronological, scientists have found. Cells can age at different rates, depending on the lifestyle of the body that contains them. Aerobic exercise, in particular, affects telomeres. In past studies, masters athletes have been shown to have longer telomeres in their white blood cells than sedentary people of the same chronological years, suggesting that at a cellular level, the athletes are more youthful. But while it is easy to obtain and look inside white blood cells, far less has been known about telomeres within cardiac cells. So for the new study, which was published this month in Experimental Physiology , the Maryland researchers and their colleagues turned to young, healthy female mice. (They chose females because they tend to run more readily than males.) The researchers wished to see what happens inside heart muscle cells after a single workout. So they taught some of the animals how to run comfortably on small treadmills and then returned them to their cages for several days so that their bodies would lose any aerobic conditioning. Other mice remained sedentary as a control group. Then the runners were placed back on the treadmills, where they ran at a tolerable intensity (in mouse terms) for 30 minutes, a workout designed to simulate moderate exercise in people. Researchers took tissue samples of the animals’ hearts either immediately after they had finished running or an hour later, and also gathered samples from sedentary mice. The scientists looked for changes within the animals’ cardiac cells in the levels of certain proteins that are known to directly prevent telomeres from shortening. They also looked at the activity of other genes that help to keep DNA in good repair. These genes release proteins that are thought to help cells adapt to the physiological stress of exercise and, in the process, also indirectly maintain telomere health. It turned out that immediately after a single, 30-minute jog, the runners’ heart cells were noticeably different than those of the animals that had not moved. In particular, they showed higher levels of the proteins directly related to telomere length. These increases were slight but consistent. The runners’ cells also had markers of greater activity in the genes that respond to DNA stress than the nonrunners’ cells. These findings indicate that a single, moderate workout beneficially alters telomere biology in the heart, says Andrew Ludlow, who was a doctoral candidate at the University of Maryland and lead author of the study. He currently is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. Presumably, such changes would accumulate with repeated training, he says, and over time help to keep cardiac telomeres longer than without the exercise. That process could be slow, though. In this study, many of the effects seen in the animals’ hearts immediately after the run were beginning to dissipate an hour later, with protein levels dropping back almost to those seen in the sedentary mice. So it may be necessary, Dr. Ludlow says, to stick with an exercise routine for some time in order to realize the cellular benefits for the heart. It is also worth repeating that this study involved mice, not people. But the implications are encouraging. It looks like getting up and moving may start to immediately change how the heart’s cells work, Dr. Ludlow says, in ways that “seem to make gene expression more youthful and keep the heart young.” 
Abbreviated, intense workouts may help people of any age become healthier, a new study of old mice that ran on treadmills suggests. Although the experiment involved rodents, not humans, the study found that old mice can tolerate high-intensity interval training and rapidly gain fitness and strength, even if they start off frail and exercise for only a few minutes a week. In recent years, high-intensity interval training has generated considerable attention among exercise scientists and practitioners. In this type of workout, you perform repeated, brief bursts of very intense exercise interspersed with longer periods of easy recovery. The primary allure of high-intensity interval training is, for most of us, its brevity. A typical high-intensity workout lasts less than 15 minutes, including a warm-up and cool-down, but has been shown in multiple studies to provide health and fitness benefits that are the same as or greater than an hour or more of continuous and relatively moderate exercise. Much of the research into short, intense exercise, however, has centered on its benefits for healthy adults, usually those below the age of 50. One famous and still ongoing study in Japan recruited adults past age 55 and found that interval walking — in which volunteers stride briskly for three minutes and then slowly for another three — enabled the older men and women to improve their endurance and blood pressures to a greater extent than walking moderately for the same amount of time. But that study focused on relatively gentle interval training by a group of relatively healthy older volunteers, leaving many questions still unanswered about whether older, more-frail bodies can successfully complete and respond to typical interval training workouts. So for the new study, which was published last month in the Journal of Gerontology A , researchers at the University at Buffalo decided to coax frail, elderly mice through a program of high-intensity interval running. They began by gathering mice that were the rodent equivalent of about age 65 in people. Until that point, these mice had all been sedentary. Some also were frail, according to a numerical scale first developed for people that considers weight, strength, endurance, and how often and rapidly the animals move about. The scientists tested the animals’ current health and fitness and then divided them into two groups. One, serving as a control, continued with their normal, sedentary lives. The others began a program of high-intensity interval training on little treadmills. Mice, even elderly ones, generally like to run but, if allowed to set their own pace, will usually stroll along at a moderate, jogging-style speed. The scientists wanted their exercising animals to strain more than that. So they ramped up the incline and speed of the treadmills. Ultimately, the animals would sprint uphill for one minute followed by a minute of walking, with that interval repeated four times. If the animals faltered at a given speed, the researchers eased off a bit, so that the program’s intensity was individualized and elastic but still high. These interval sessions continued three times a week for four months, which would approximate about eight years in our lives, according to Dr. Bruce Troen, a professor of medicine and head of the division of geriatrics at the University at Buffalo, who, with his colleague Kenneth Seldeen and others, conducted the study. (It was funded primarily by the Department of Veterans Affairs.) By the end of the study, the mice were the rodent equivalent of septuagenarians. And those that had remained sedentary displayed the expected physical hallmarks of being that age. They had less muscle mass, strength and endurance than four months before and moved more infrequently and slowly. But the interval-trained mice seemed in many ways younger than they had been at the start. In particular, they were stronger; when pulled backward gently by researchers, they would cling to a bar longer than at the start of the study. They also had greater endurance capacity, as well as more muscle mass in their hind legs than the sedentary animals, and they scampered faster. Few now were frail. Perhaps most important, “the animals had tolerated the high-intensity interval training well,” despite their advanced ages, Dr. Troen says. None had found the effort impossible. Of course, mice are not people and their capabilities do not necessarily mimic ours. Anyone, whatever his or her age, who might wish to try high-intensity interval training should talk with a doctor first, Dr. Troen says, and perhaps look for supervised interval training programs at local gyms or Y.M.C.A.s. Some offer H.I.I.T. classes specifically aimed at older participants and led by instructors with training in geriatric exercise. This study also did not compare interval training to other types of exercise and so cannot tease out whether interval training leads to better health outcomes among older people than, for instance, long walks. But intervals do have that signature advantage, Dr. Troen says: “You get done so quickly.” Related Coverage How Music Can Boost a High-Intensity Workout Oct. 22, 2014 Image Can High-Intensity Exercise Help Me Lose Weight? And Other Questions, Answered May 11, 2016 Image How Exercise May Help the Brain Grow Stronger June 15, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more Reader Center tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more Reader Center tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS               *************    Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Well Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Pop a Pill for Heartburn? Try Diet and Exercise Instead Image Paul W. Rogers By  Jane E. Brody March 20, 2017 Many Americans would rather take a drug than change their habits to control a persistent ailment. Yet, every medication has side effects, some of which can be worse than the disease they are meant to treat. Drugs considered safe when first marketed can turn out to have hazards, both bothersome and severe, that become apparent only after millions of people take them for a long enough time. Such is the case with a popular class of drugs called proton pump inhibitors, or P.P.I.s, now used by more than 15 million Americans and many more people worldwide to counter an increasingly common ailment: acid reflux, which many people refer to as heartburn or indigestion. These medications are now linked to a growing number of complications , ranging in seriousness from nutrient deficiencies, joint pain and infections to bone fractures, heart attacks and dementia . While definitive evidence for most of the risks identified thus far is lacking, consumers plagued by acid reflux would be wise to consider an alternative approach, namely diet and lifestyle changes that can minimize symptoms and even heal damage already done. Acid reflux is more than just a nuisance. It involves the backward flow of stomach acid into the tissues above it. It results when the lower esophageal sphincter, a ring of muscle between the esophagus and the stomach, fails to close tightly enough to prevent the contents of the stomach from moving up instead of down. Sometimes the upper sphincter, between the esophagus and the throat, malfunctions as well. Acid reflux is a serious disorder that can and must be treated to prevent symptoms and stave off potentially life-threatening consequences. Known medically and commercially as GERD, the acronym for gastroesophageal reflux disease, repeated bathing of the soft tissues of the esophagus with corrosive stomach acid can seriously damage them and even cause esophageal cancer, which is often fatal. Contrary to what many believe, heartburn is but one of the many symptoms of GERD, and failure to recognize the others when heartburn is not among them can result in harmful untreated reflux. In addition to indigestion, GERD can cause a persistent dry cough, sore throat, frequent throat clearing, hoarseness, burping or hiccups, bloating, difficulty swallowing and a sensation of a lump in the throat. If, when faced with such an otherwise unexplainable symptom, your doctor fails to think of GERD as a possible reason, you might suggest it yourself. An examination of the esophagus may be the only way to find out if someone without obvious heartburn has acid reflux but doesn’t know it. Dr. Jonathan Aviv, an ear, nose and throat specialist affiliated with Mount Sinai Icahn School of Medicine in New York, was in his mid-30s when he developed a frightening symptom that turned out to be caused by acid reflux. He was suddenly awakened one night gasping for air and feeling like he was being choked. Because he’d never complained of heartburn, his own doctor had trouble believing that acid reflux could be the explanation. Yet treating this ailment brought relief and set Dr. Aviv on a yearslong journey to learn how best to manage it. He has now written a book, “The Acid Watcher Diet,” that both explains how the varied symptoms of acid reflux arise, and details a program for healing and prevention that can help many, if not most, people avoid the medications commonly prescribed to treat it. One characteristic often associated with acid reflux — being overweight, especially with abdominal obesity — largely explains why the condition has become so common in Western countries. Someone with a body mass index in the overweight range is almost twice as likely to have GERD as a person of normal weight. Losing weight is one of the best ways to find relief without having to rely on medication. Quitting smoking, limiting alcohol and avoiding carbonated drinks are also important protective measures. Smoking and alcohol can loosen tension of the upper esophageal sphincter and cause symptoms of reflux like hoarseness, postnasal drip and shortness of breath by irritating the mouth, larynx and trachea, Dr. Aviv reports. Eating big meals, lying down before a meal is digested, and exercising too soon after eating can also trigger symptoms. Reflux sufferers are often advised to eat five or six small meals a day rather than one or two big ones, and to avoid eating within three hours of bedtime. For further protection, the head of the bed can be raised by six inches or more. But while certain common foods — like raw onions, garlic, citrus juices, coffee and chocolate — are likely to cause reflux in most people with the condition, Dr. Aviv and other experts emphasize that everyone is different , and trial and error is the most effective way to determine an individual’s trigger foods and drinks. Specialists suggest keeping a food and drink diary for a week or two, recording everything consumed and the timing of symptoms to help identify a person’s trigger foods. A food does not have to be obviously acidic to be troublesome. High-fat foods are problematic for many people because they take a long time to digest. Dr. Aviv points out that many commercially produced foods and drinks are treated with acid-containing substances to enhance flavor and shelf life. Accordingly, the 28-day “healing” diet he suggests consists almost entirely of natural, unprocessed foods, especially lean protein foods like light-meat poultry, fish, egg whites and low-fat dairy, beans (combined with whole grains), and nonacidic vegetables and fruits. High-fiber foods are very helpful, “second only to eliminating acidic foods,” Dr. Aviv said. Fiber enhances digestion, reducing pressure on the lower esophageal sphincter, and can aid in weight loss and maintenance, among other benefits like reducing inflammation. Try to eat a pound of vegetables each day, half of which are cooked and the other half eaten raw, as well as half a pound of raw fruit. Good sources include broccoli, carrots, beets, green leafy vegetables, apples, berries, bananas, avocados and pears. Other helpful fiber-rich foods include almonds, walnuts, lentils, chickpeas and lima beans. If adopting the above measures fails to fully control acid reflux, taking a proton pump inhibitor may also be needed. But a P.P.I. should be used in the lowest effective dose at the correct time and for the shortest possible period, experts say. “Studies have revealed that 80 percent of Americans may be taking these powerful meds incorrectly,” Dr. Aviv wrote. He said they should be taken 30 to 60 minutes before eating breakfast or dinner (or both), but not used as an “antidote” to consuming acidic foods. 
People who regularly run or walk briskly appear to have healthier discs in their spines than people who do not exercise, according to one of the first studies to closely examine links between movement and disc health. The findings refute a widely held belief that activities like running might overtax the spine and indicate that, instead, they make it sturdier. The human spine is a complicated mechanism, composed of vertebral bones cushioned between intervertebral discs. These discs, shaped like tiny whoopee cushions, contain a viscous fluid that compresses and absorbs pressure during movement, keeping the back in good working form. With age, disease or injury, spinal discs can degenerate and bulge, resulting in back pain, which can be debilitating. Until recently, scientists and clinicians had believed that people could do little to strengthen their spinal discs, although they obviously could injure them. Muscles and bones respond to the physical strains of movement by becoming larger and stronger. But most experts thought that spinal discs remain impervious to this process and might in fact be harmed by the jarring from running. There were tantalizing hints in animal studies, however, that this idea could be out of date. When scientists in Sweden scanned the spines of mice before and after they ran for several weeks on treadmills, the researchers noticed significant increases in the size of their spinal discs, indicating that those structures had been responding and adapting to the demands of running. But mice, of course, run on four legs and are in all other respects not people, and it remained unclear whether running and similar activities would be good or not for the human spine. So for the new study, which was published in April in Scientific Reports , researchers at Deakin University in Australia and other institutions decided to examine the backs of people who run and others who do not. Eventually they recruited 79 adult men and women, two-thirds of whom said that they were runners. Some of these told the researchers that they covered more than 30 miles (about 50 kilometers) a week in training. The researchers designated these as the “long-distance” group. The others said that they ran between 12 and 25 miles a week. All had been training for at least five years. The final group rarely exercised at all. To ensure that people’s reported activity levels were accurate, the researchers asked their volunteers to wear accelerometers for a week. Then they scanned everyone’s spines, using a sophisticated type of M.R.I. that precisely measures the size and liquidity of each disc. And they found differences. In general, the runners’ discs were larger and contained more fluid than the discs of the men and women who did not exercise. Since both greater size and increased levels of internal fluid indicate better disc health, the runners harbored fundamentally healthier spines than the people who were sedentary, says Daniel Belavy, the study leader and a professor of exercise at the Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition at Deakin University. Interestingly, mileage barely mattered. The discs of the people who ran less than 30 miles per week were almost identical to those in the long-distance group, suggesting that, compared to moderate mileage, heavy training does not augment disc health but also does not contribute to deterioration. Still, the researchers wished to gain more specificity about the ideal level of exercise for disc health and so began rooting deeper into their accelerometer data. Accelerometers measure movement in terms of acceleration forces, or how much power your body is generating when you move. The researchers soon pinpointed a narrow range of forces that were associated with the healthiest discs. They then asked 10 of their volunteers to step onto treadmills and recreate these forces and found, to their surprise, that running was not required. Walking briskly at a pace of about four miles per hour — “which for some people would be a jog,” Dr. Belavy says — generated enough physical force to bring people’s movement into the range associated with the healthiest discs. Slower walks and standing in place were outside this range, as were runs at paces beyond about 5.5 miles per hour. The sweet spot for disc health seemed to reside somewhere in the range of fast walks and gentle jogs. “You can go running” for the sake of your back, Dr. Belavy concludes, “but you don’t have to.” A brisk walk will also help, it seems. Of course, this was a one-time snapshot of people’s backs. It cannot prove that exercise caused people’s discs to become healthier, but only that people who ran had healthier discs. It also does not tell us whether exercise might aid in treating existing disc problems. Dr. Belavy and his colleagues hope to delve into those issues in future randomized experiments. But for now, he says, the available evidence strongly indicates that “discs like movement,” and it would be worthwhile to take your back for a walk today.