He learned of his mixed-race ancestry through a genetic test, and discovered relatives.  Brian Flaherty for The New York Times Sections Skip to content Skip to site index With a Simple DNA Test, Family Histories Are Rewritten Widespread DNA testing has shed light on the ancestry of millions of Americans. But these services have limitations, and the results can be uncertain. Bob Hutchinson at his home in Pacifica, Calif. He learned of his mixed-race ancestry through a genetic test, and discovered relatives.  Brian Flaherty for The New York Times Supported by By  Gina Kolata Aug. 28, 2017 Bob Hutchinson’s mother told him and his siblings almost nothing about her family, no matter how often they asked. “She was good at brushing people off,” said Mr. Hutchinson, 60. Growing up, there were no photos of his mother as a child in the home, or of her own parents. She said that she was an only child, that her parents were dead. Her heritage, she claimed, was Italian and Swedish. Mr. Hutchinson suspected there was more to the story. Then his sister-in-law, digging into the family past, found his mother’s childhood home listed in a 1930 census. The family had lived in Montclair, N.J., and was described as “Negro.” Mr. Hutchinson, who runs an advertising agency and lives in Pacifica, Calif., had never been told he had African-American heritage. These days, family secrets like this one are becoming harder to keep. A growing number of companies now offer DNA tests that promise to pinpoint a customer’s heritage and, with permission, to identify genetic relatives. The firms include generalists like 23andMe and Ancestry.com and specialty companies like African Ancestry. Millions of people have signed up for the tests, sending saliva samples to laboratories and paying $100 to $350 or more for an analysis. The customers are eager to know where they came from, to find a familial context that may be lacking. The answers hidden in DNA can be revelatory, shedding light on hidden events occurring decades earlier and forever changing the family narrative. But a new analysis of DNA test kits by The Wirecutter, a review site owned by The New York Times, finds that the services also have limitations that the providers do not always fully acknowledge. Mr. Hutchinson decided to have his DNA analyzed by 23andMe. The report revealed he is one-eighth sub-Saharan African, which means that his mother was of mixed race. There was some Italian and Swedish heritage. Mr. Hutchinson also learned that his mother was not an only child, but had a brother. A genealogist helped him track down some first cousins in Alabama, who said they had been told never to contact Mr. Hutchinson or his family. The cousins were delighted to hear from him. He plans to visit next year at Mardi Gras. Mr. Hutchinson’s results were enlightening, but in other contexts ethnicity has posed a particularly knotty problem for DNA testing firms. The very definitions of “race” and “ethnicity” are fuzzy, said Joseph Pickrell, a computational geneticist at the New York Genome Center laboratory, affiliated with Columbia University. “Different people mean different things when they say ‘race,’” he said. In the United States, for example, a person with almost any African ancestry often is identified as black. “That’s not necessarily the case in other parts of the world,” Dr. Pickrell said. Researchers at 23andMe acknowledged the difficulty in a recent paper , writing, “It is important to note that ancestry, ethnicity, identity and race are complex labels that result both from visible traits, such as skin color, and from cultural, economic, geographical and social factors.” In a recent study, the researchers decided to use Census Bureau definitions — black, white, Hispanic — to ask how often people who identify as one race actually have genetic markers indicating a mixed heritage. After examining data from 160,000 customers who agreed to participate, the geneticists learned that 3.5 percent of those who said they were white actually had DNA that was 1 percent or more African in origin. The chances of having African ancestry were highest in the South, and highest of all in South Carolina, where at least 13 percent of those who said they were white had African ancestors. Among those who said they were black, genetic ancestry over all was 73.2 percent African, 0.8 percent Native American and 24 percent European. Experts say the large proportion of European DNA found in African-Americans can be traced to before the Civil War, and the rape of enslaved African women. The ancestry of those who said they were Hispanic was something of a hodgepodge. Some had no Native American ancestry; others had 50 percent or more. Mr. Hutchinson’s family photographs. Through the genetic testing service 23andMe, Mr. Hutchinson learned that his mother had a brother, and a genealogist helped him track down some first cousins in Alabama, who said they had been told never to contact Mr. Hutchinson or his family.  Brian Flaherty for The New York Times Hispanics living in the South tended to have more African ancestry. As a group, their DNA was 6.2 percent African, 18 percent Native American and 65.1 percent European. Jewish ancestry, on the other hand, is far easier to discern. Historically, these populations were small and Jews tended not to marry outsiders. As a result, they share telltale sequences of DNA, easily identified by testing. But is this sort of ethnic categorization really instructive? Human beings share more than 99.9 percent of their DNA; what makes us different is vanishingly insignificant in terms of genetics. If testing “tells me I’m 95 percent Ashkenazi Jewish and 5 percent Korean, is that really different from 100 percent Ashkenazi Jewish and zero percent Korean?” Jonathan Marks, an anthropology professor at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, wondered in The Wirecutter. The question of ethnicity is enmeshed with another difficult challenge for DNA testers: geography. Genetics researchers generally know which DNA sequences originated on which continents. But pinpointing a particular country of origin, as many testing services claim to do, is far trickier. Scientists simply do not have good data on the genetic characteristics of particular countries in, say, East Africa or East Asia. Even in more developed regions, distinguishing between Polish and, for instance, Russian heritage is inexact at best. The precise numbers offered by some testing services raise eyebrows among genetics researchers. “It’s all privatized science, and the algorithms are not generally available for peer review,” Dr. Marks said. “That’s why their ads always specify that this is for recreational purposes only: lawyer-speak for, ‘These results have no scientific standing.’” For many, though, the point of DNA testing has nothing to do with ethnicity. Theresa Musumeci, 49, of Hockessin, Del., wanted to solve a longstanding mystery in her family. Who was her biological grandmother? Ms. Green and Ms. Clark are mail carriers in Daphne, Ala., and Mr. Hutchinson has plans to join them for Mardi Gras next year. Decades ago, Ms. Musumeci’s mother had discovered she had been adopted after she overheard the nuns at her Catholic high school in Camden, N.J., talking about it. For years, she searched for clues to her birth mother’s identity, eventually learning her name: Mary Culliton. But Ms. Musumeci’s mother died in 1995, at 55, without learning much more. Ms. Musumeci decided to continue the quest by submitting a sample to Ancestry.com, which also will notify users of relatives in its database if they have given permission. Among the matches were Ms. Musumeci’s half brother and a few well-known cousins — but also a man she had never heard of. His great-aunt, it turned out, was Ms. Musumeci’s great-grandmother — Mary Culliton’s mother. He filled her in on the woman’s life. Eventually Ms. Musumeci discovered other long-lost aunts and uncles. “I found five great family members,” she said. Yet there is one regret: Her mother did not survive long enough to learn the story. “I feel bad that the technology was not available for her,” Ms. Musumeci said. If DNA testing has the potential to shed light on new family relationships, it also can muddy those that had seemed settled. While putting together The Wirecutter’s own report, one researcher learned that a grandparent was in fact not biologically related. Such news can be burdensome — or freeing. Mark, a banker in Delaware, got his test results back from Ancestry.com along with a list of relatives in its database. Oddly, there was no one on the list from his father’s side of the family. There was one name he recognized, though: his father’s best friend. Who, it turned out, actually was his biological father. Mark, 43, whose last name was withheld to protect his family’s privacy, is estranged from his mother, and the man he knew as his father died more than a decade ago. So he reached out to his father’s best friend, who confirmed an affair with his mother decades ago. The two live near each other and have gotten together several times recently. The secret that the older man thought he would take to his grave is well out of the bag. On one recent outing, Mark said, “he even showed me the place where I probably was conceived.” 
Ms. Reilly found that she had inherited an ApoE4 gene that increases the risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease, and bought a long-term care policy in response. Pat Reilly had good reason to worry about Alzheimer’s disease: Her mother had it, and she saw firsthand the havoc it could wreak on a family, much of it financial. So Ms. Reilly, 77, a retired social worker in Ann Arbor, Mich., applied for a long-term care insurance policy. Wary of enrolling people at risk for dementia, the insurance company tested her memory three times before issuing the policy. But Ms. Reilly knew something the insurer did not: She has inherited the ApoE4 gene, which increases the lifetime risk of developing Alzheimer’s. “I decided I’d best get long-term care insurance,” she said. An estimated 5.5 million people in the United States have Alzheimer’s disease, and these patients constitute half of all nursing home residents. Yet very few people in the United States have been tested for the ApoE4 gene. But last month, with the approval of the Food and Drug Administration, the gene testing company 23andMe began offering tests that reveal whether people have the variant, as well as assessing their risks for developing such conditions as Parkinson’s and celiac disease. Other genetics companies are planning to offer similar tests, and soon millions of people will have a better idea what their medical futures might be. Recent research has found that many, like Ms. Reilly, are likely to begin preparing for the worst. But for companies selling long-term care insurance, these tests could be a disaster, sending risky patients in search of policies even as those with fewer risks shy away, damaging an already fragile business. “There is a question about whether the industry is in a death spiral anyway,” said Robert Hunter, director of insurance at the Consumer Federation of America. “This could make it worse.” The tests are simple: All people have to do is send away a saliva sample and pay $199. Their disease risks, if they say they want to know them, will be delivered with a report on ancestry and on how their genes influence such traits as flushing when they drink alcohol or having straight hair. The company will not reveal how many people have received disease-risk data, but it says that in Britain and Canada, where it has offered such testing for several years, about three-quarters of their customers have asked for it. 23andMe has sold its genetic services to more than two million people worldwide since 2007. The issue for now is with long-term care insurance, not employment and not — at least so far — health insurance. Under the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, companies cannot ask employees to take gene tests and cannot use any such results in employment decisions; insurers are not permitted to require gene tests or to use the results in coverage decisions. But legislation proposed in the House would exempt corporate “wellness” programs from some of these requirements. And the American Health Care Act, passed by the House, would permit states to waive some insurance safeguards regarding pre-existing conditions. At the moment, companies selling long-term care insurance — unlike medical insurers — are permitted to ask about health status and take future health into consideration when deciding whom to insure and how much to charge. The 23andMe test results will not appear in people’s medical records, and the company promises not to disclose identifiable findings to third parties. It is up to the customers to reveal them — and the fear for insurers is that many will not. Two-thirds of nursing home residents are on Medicaid, and the remaining private insurers are already struggling. In the early 2000s, more than 100 firms offered long-term care insurance , according to the Treasury Department. By the end of 2015, only 12 firms offered it, and new enrollees fell from 171,000 to 104,000. The insurers charged too little for these policies, experts say; policyholders have turned out to be much sicker than anticipated. To pay for an unanticipated increase in policyholders who develop Alzheimer’s, insurers would have to raise prices, said Don Taylor, a professor of public policy at Duke University who has studied the issue. Increasing numbers of people at low risk might decide the insurance was not worth the rising price. Even many at high risk would eventually find the policies unaffordable. It is the definition of an insurance death spiral. If that happens, said Mark Rothstein, the director of the bioethics institute at the University of Louisville’s medical school, even more people with Alzheimer’s will end up on Medicaid, with the federal government paying for their nursing home care. Someone must pay, he said. The only question is whether it will be taxpayers or policyholders. “How do you want to spread the risk?” Mr. Rothstein asked. For 23andMe, the new tests are simply a way to help people learn about their makeup. “People clearly want information about themselves,” said Anne Wojcicki, the chief executive at 23andMe. “There is a demand.” Yet even if just a minority of 23andMe customers decided to game the current insurance system, “it’s enough to perturb the market,” said Dr. Robert Cook-Deegan, a professor at the school for the future of innovation in society at Arizona State University, who has studied the issue. Research by Dr. Robert C. Green, a geneticist at Harvard University, indicates that this is exactly what is likely to happen. Drawing on data from his clinical trials involving more than 1,000 people, Dr. Green has found that people who learn they have the ApoE4 gene fare just as well if they get the results without counseling. But he also found that those who learned they had the gene variant — Ms. Reilly was one of them — were nearly six times more likely to buy long-term care insurance than those who did not. The ApoE4 gene variant is present in about a quarter of the population. Many thought there was no need to tell the insurer why they suddenly wanted a policy. “All the insurance companies are concerned about this,” said Dr. Green, who has been discussing the problem with industry executives. Major insurers declined to comment. A trade group, American Council of Life Insurers, issued an email statement by Mariana Gomez-Vock, the group’s senior counsel. “Though it is difficult to speculate on the potential impact of the latest 23andMe offering, any situation that has the ability to significantly increase adverse selection could impact the availability and affordability of products over time,” she wrote. “We need to be on the same page with the applicant, where both sides share the same information,” she added. But will that happen? “I don’t see a good outcome here,” Mr. Taylor said.
The Online Gene Test Finds a Dangerous Mutation. It May Well Be Wrong. Third-party analysis of raw DNA is not as rigorous as that done in a certified laboratory. But many consumers don’t understand that their results are not conclusive. Dr. Joshua Clayton, a 29-year-old radiology resident at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, wanted to learn about his ancestry. So he sent a sample of his saliva to 23andMe, the genetic testing company. His report was pretty mundane — no new revelations. But then he sent the profile created by 23andMe to a separate company called Promethease, which promises to do a more in-depth analysis for genetic mutations that cause disease. The news was not good. Dr. Clayton got back a report with a sinister red box at the top saying he had a mutation linked to Lynch syndrome, a frightening genetic disorder that leads to potentially deadly cancers at an early age. In an interview, Dr. Clayton said he “knew, at least cursorily, that false positives were common with these tests.” But “that didn’t change the frightened feelings or concern, because I certainly couldn’t blow it off.” After two weeks of panic and yet another genetic test at a company with expertise in medical diagnostics, he learned the red box result was wrong. He simply didn’t have the mutation. More Americans are embracing consumer genetic testing, but the Food and Drug Administration limits what major firms like 23andMe or Ancestry.com can say about a consumer’s health. So many people are taking an additional step: uploading all the raw data created by these companies  to second companies for additional analysis. But these are not firms certified to provide medical diagnoses, nor are they sophisticated academic centers. Companies like Promethease warn customers not to regard their results as medical diagnoses. Mostly, they are comparing a consumer’s raw data to gene variants reported to be linked to disease. But it’s not at all clear that consumers understand how uncertain their results may be. There are no systematic studies of how often the direct-to-consumer results and third-party analyses are wrong. In one small study, Ambry Genetics — a lab certified to do medical testing — looked at 49 samples sent in by physicians whose patients had been told that they had disease-causing mutations by third-party interpreters. Ambry found that 40 percent were wrong . In addition, some genetic variations classified by second companies as threatening actually were benign. This tiny sample doesn’t prove that the false-positive rate is 40 percent. But patients like Dr. Clayton are not uncommon, genetic counselors say. And they are increasingly worried about the flip side: false negatives that reassure consumers who actually should be worried. Dr. Judy Garber, director of the Center for Cancer Genetics and Prevention at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, said one of her patients was told by a consumer testing company she had Li-Fraumeni syndrome, which greatly raises the risk of a number of  rare cancers. Further testing showed that diagnosis was wrong. “It makes you worry about the people who don’t come in,” said Dr. Garber. “People think they are getting the same kind of genetic testing as they would get from a certified clinical laboratory,” said Stephany Tandy-Connor, a genetic counselor at Ambry. “Nothing could be further from the truth.” Even some doctors are misled by the reports, she said. Of course, companies like Ambry have an interest in making sure their business is not usurped by consumer testing firms. But it’s also true that the method used by consumer companies is very different from those used by certified clinical laboratories. Consumer companies method look for changes in tiny segments of genes, rather than examining the entire gene and looking for alterations. That is cheap but not comprehensive. And because they are not making medical diagnoses, these companies are not subject to the sort of quality controls as certified labs, which require extensive confirmation that results are free of errors. Compounding the problem, the second companies rely on databases that may contain errors — so even if the genetic alteration found by the first company is correct, the analysis can be wrong. Ambry found such patients in its recent analysis. Greg Lennon, a co-founder of Promethease, said that the company’s reports include a disclaimer saying the data are “not intended for medical or health purposes.” Customers are warned to seek out “an independent, clinically validated test” if they are told of a mutation and to seek out a genetic counselor. When errors occur, they usually derive from mistakes in the raw DNA data, said Mike Cariaso, also a co-founder of Promethease. 23andMe offers limited medical testing — for example, looking for three of the most common mutations in breast cancer genes that occur mostly in Ashkenazi Jews. But there are thousands of other alterations in those genes that the company does not track. The F.D.A. has given 23andMe approval to do similar testing for 10 disorders linked to genetic mutations, but not for the huge number of others, including Lynch syndrome, that companies like Promethease look for. The variations in DNA in 23andMe’s raw data “are not for medical or diagnostic use,” said Shirley Wu, the company’s director of product science. “The data hasn’t undergone the same kind of quality control and validation as our variations in our health reports.” The company warns customers of this before providing their raw data, Dr. Wu said. For the consumer who expects validated diagnoses, it’s all a bit confusing. Testing companies like 23andMe say they are not at fault, because they make it clear that their data are not meant to be used for medical diagnoses. The companies that provide deeper analyses, like Promethease, say they take only raw genetic profiles created elsewhere and use publicly available data to scan for mutations that can increase disease risk. Promethease didn’t author any of it. “So much of what I have seen in these D.T.C. tests are false positives and cannot be trusted,” said Dr. Robert Nussbaum, chief medical officer at Invitae, a medical testing lab. Still, he added, false negatives are even more worrisome. Dr. Clayton learned only after weeks of agonizing that his Lynch syndrome diagnosis wasn’t really a diagnosis at all. “My wife and I were talking about having children,” he recalled. “What do you do? Do you make that decision to pass this on to them?” And what about disability insurance? If he got cancer, he might not be able to work. But could he even get insurance? Dr. Clayton searched online for Lynch syndrome experts and found Dr. Theodora Ross, director of the cancer genetics program at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. She had Dr. Clayton’s DNA tested at a lab certified to make the diagnosis. That was how he found out the report was wrong. He was lucky, he said, that he had medical training and knew where to find help. “I don’t think that applies to a lot of people,” he said. Gina Kolata writes about science and medicine. 
F.D.A. Approves First Home Testing for 3 Breast Cancer Mutations, With Caveats. The Food and Drug Administration for the first time has authorized a genetic testing company to offer screenings for three breast cancer mutations common in Ashkenazi Jews, giving consumers the ability to initiate testing at home and see results without talking to a doctor or counselor. The agency’s action on Tuesday permits the testing company, 23andMe, to report results as part of its $199 Health and Ancestry product, which uses DNA from saliva samples to inform customers about their families’ countries of origin, along with information on genetic health risks. There will be no extra charge for the additional reports, which should be available in a few weeks to customers who actively opt in and request to see them, company officials said. Women who carry one of the three BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations are at substantially increased risk for developing breast and ovarian cancer, and men who carry one are at higher risk for breast cancer and may be at higher risk for prostate cancer as well. But testing negative for the three mutations does not mean someone is in the clear, as there are over a thousand BRCA mutations associated with increased cancer risk. Some critics say that comprehensive genetic testing — an exhaustive analysis to detect all mutations associated with an increase in breast cancer risk — is preferable. Physicians, geneticists and policymakers have long been concerned that the enthusiasm over personalized medical information and genetic testing may place consumers who misunderstand or misinterpret results at risk of jeopardizing their health. Even for Jews of Ashkenazi descent, whose families originated in Eastern and Central Europe and who are most likely to test positive for the three mutations, testing negative is no panacea, as they may carry other mutations that increase cancer risk. “The test provides information to certain individuals who may be at increased breast, ovarian or prostate cancer risk and who might not otherwise get genetic screening, and is a step forward in the availability of direct-to-consumer genetic tests. But it has a lot of caveats,” said Donald St. Pierre, acting director of the Office of In Vitro Diagnostics and Radiological Health in the F.D.A.’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health. “The test should not be used as a substitute for seeing your doctor for cancer screenings or counseling on genetic and lifestyle factors that increase or decrease cancer risk,” he added. This is not the first time that 23andMe will be offering reports on the three BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. The company started reporting to customers on these mutations in 2010 without F.D.A. approval, but stopped providing all health data in 2013 after receiving warnings from the agency, which requested information to prove the test was accurate and provided consistent reproducible results. The agency has also insisted on special controls, including a warning statement explaining the test’s limitations in lay terms stating that a negative test does not rule out other genetic mutations associated with cancer risk, and stipulating that the tests should not be used to determine medical treatment. The warnings also state that the tests should not substitute for visiting a doctor, and that tests confirming the results must be carried out before making medical decisions on treatment, such as anti-hormone therapies, or on prophylactic options like mastectomy or removal of the ovaries. The warning also cautions that people may experience anxiety when undergoing genetic testing, and recommends that they discuss any concerns with their doctor. “My preferred approach would be that this is done in the context of having somebody help you interpret that information, and talk to you about what it means in real time,” said Dr. Susan Domchek, a medical oncologist and expert on breast cancer genetics and prevention at Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. The chief executive of 23andMe, Anne Wojcicki, said there was high consumer demand for the test. “One of the important things we learned is that a lot of individuals did not even think that they were potential carriers and did not know they had any Jewish ancestry or family history,” she said. “We feel passionately that in some cases this saved their lives.” 
On the morning of April 7, I was in Dallas giving a talk about health advice — mostly telling the group that people already know what to do, they know the eat-less-exercise-more-don’t-smoke mantras, and they believe them, even if they don’t follow them. I’ve been reporting on medicine for The New York Times since 1987, and I have seen study after study showing that people do not follow health advice. So I wondered aloud why there is so much emphasis on educating the public about how to be healthy, and why so many believe that if you do keep to the rules, you will be protected from disease and even from aging. Afterward, Dr. Theodora Ross, a geneticist who directs the high-risk cancer genetics program at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, said she had a story for me: A recent patient of hers had sent a saliva sample to a direct-to-consumer testing company, 23andMe, which detects small differences in DNA at hundreds of locations that can indicate ancestry and various health conditions.For the most part, direct-to-consumer genetic tests are recreational genetics. Find out about your ancestors. Find out what your “genetic weight” is supposed to be. Find out, for example, if you have the markers that determine whether you flush when you drink alcohol, or — if you are a man — whether you’re likely to go bald. But this patient’s case had turned into something more dire. The report came back mundane — his ancestry was as he expected, and there were no revelations about predispositions to certain illnesses. But 23andMe analyzes only a small portion of the differences it detects. So he sent his data to another company, Promethease. This time, the results were terrifying. It said he was likely to have a devastating disorder, Lynch syndrome, which leads to serious cancers at a young age. Yet the report was wrong, which he discovered only when Dr. Ross had his DNA tested by a lab certified to make the diagnosis. The patient, Josh Clayton, a medical resident, agreed to talk to me and let me use his name for an article on the perils of relying on direct-to-consumer genetic analyses . In speaking to Josh, I didn’t say that I’d had one of those there-but-for-the-grace-of-God moments. Late last year, my son Stefan also sent a saliva sample to 23andMe. Stefan was trained as a scientist, with four years as a postdoctoral fellow in neuroscience, so he knew the limitations of testing. I did not write the article because of my experience, but it ran parallel to Josh’s, just with a different ending: Like Josh, Stefan was curious about his genetics. His 23andMe report, like Josh’s, found no risks for anything. And Stefan knew that it was not even close to a complete scan. I had told Stefan not to tell me his 23andMe results because they included a report on the ApoE gene. One variant of that gene, ApoE4, increases the risk for Alzheimer’s disease. If he had a copy of ApoE4, he might have inherited it from me. And I did not want to know if I had it. I prefer not to know about risks for diseases that cannot be prevented. Stefan called me anyway. He did not have ApoE4, he said. And, he told me, he had sent his 23andMe data to Promethease. Unlike Josh’s report, his found no disease risks. Both 23andMe and Promethease prominently warn customers that their data are not a substitute for genetic testing by a certified lab. But the promise of conquering the unknown can lead even sophisticated consumers to throw out all the warnings they know to abide, to quickly click through terms of service agreements. After Stefan got his reports, I got curious too — after all, I could still have one copy of ApoE4; he might just not have inherited it. So I sent a saliva sample to 23andMe. The results were not very interesting — no disease risks, no surprises, no ApoE4. I was completely credulous (though I should not have been, because I know the limits of this testing). What if Stefan had gotten a report saying he had Lynch, or some other frightening disorder? How sophisticated would I have been? Would I have believed that the report was accurate? What would I have done? I would hope that Stefan would have prevented me from panicking. Yet I wonder. What would most people do if they learned their DNA revealed a dread disease was in their future? Josh’s story was, as Dr. Ross had promised, a sobering tale. And it led me to write about the limitations of those tests. There were some data on false positives — customers, like Josh, whose reports erroneously said they had a terrifying disease. But there were no data that I could find on false negatives — customers who thought they had no disease risk but actually did.  
You know your cholesterol, your blood pressure ... your heart gene score? Researchers say a new way of analyzing genetic test data may one day help identify people at high risk of a youthful heart attack in time to help. Today, gene testing mostly focuses on rare mutations in one or a few genes, like those that cause cystic fibrosis or sickle cell disease, or the BRCA gene responsible for a small fraction of breast cancer. It is less useful for some of the most common diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, because they are influenced by vast numbers of genes-gone-wrong working together in complicated ways. Monday, researchers reported a new way to measure millions of small genetic variations that add up to cause harm, letting them calculate someone's inherited risk for the most common form of heart disease and four other serious disorders. The potential cardiac impact: They estimated that up to 25 million Americans may have triple the average person's risk for coronary artery disease even if they haven't yet developed warning signs like high cholesterol. "What I foresee is in five years, each person will know this risk number, this 'polygenic risk score,' similar to the way each person knows his or her cholesterol," said Dr. Sekar Kathiresan who led the research team from the Broad Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School. If the approach pans out and doctors adopt it, a bad score wouldn't mean you'd get a disease, just that your genetic makeup increases the chance — one more piece of information in deciding care. For example, when the researchers tested the system using a DNA database from Britain, less than 1 percent of people with the lowest risk scores were diagnosed with coronary artery disease, compared to 11 percent of people with the highest risk score. "There are things you can do to lower the risk," Kathiresan said — the usual advice about diet, exercise, cholesterol medication and not smoking helps. On the flip side, a low-risk score "doesn't give you a free pass," he added. An unhealthy lifestyle could overwhelm the protection of good genes. The scoring system also can predict an increased risk of Type 2 diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, breast cancer and an irregular heartbeat called atrial fibrillation, the team reported in the journal Nature Genetics — noting that next steps include learning what might likewise lower those risks. It doesn't require the most sophisticated type of genetic testing. Instead, Kathiresan can calculate risk scores for those five diseases — eventually maybe more — simply by reanalyzing the kind of raw data people receive after sending a cheek swab to companies like 23andMe. A geneticist who specializes in cardiovascular disease, he hopes to open a website where people can send in such data to learn their heart risk, as part of continuing research. Kathiresan and co-author Dr. Amit Khera, a Mass General cardiologist, are co-inventors on a patent application for the system. Other scientists and companies have long sought ways to measure risk from multiple, additive gene effects — the "poly" in polygenic — and Myriad Genetics has begun selling a type of polygenic test for breast cancer risk. But specialists in heart disease and genetics who weren't involved with the research called the new findings exciting because of their scope. "The results should be eye-opening for cardiologists," said Dr. Charles C. Hong, director of cardiovascular research at the University of Maryland School of Medicine. "The only disappointment is that this score applies only to those with European ancestry, so I wonder if similar scores are in the works for the large majority of the world population that is not white." Hong pointed to a friend who recently died of a massive heart attack despite being a super-fit marathon runner who'd never smoked, the kind of puzzling death that doctors have long hoped that a better understanding of genetics could help to prevent. "Most of the variation in disease risk comes from an enormous number of very tiny effects" in genes, agreed Stanford University genetics professor Jonathan Pritchard. "This is the first time polygenic scores have really been shown to reach the level of precision where they can have an impact" on patient health. First, the Boston-based team combed previous studies that mapped the DNA of large numbers of people, looking for links to the five diseases — not outright mutations but minor misspellings in the genetic code. Each variation alone would have only a tiny effect on health. They developed a computerized system that analyzed how those effects add up, and tested it using DNA and medical records from 400,000 people stored in Britain's UK Biobank. Scores more than three times the average person's risk were deemed high. 
Supported by Clues to Your Health Are Hidden at 6.6 Million Spots in Your DNA With a sophisticated new algorithm, scientists have found a way to forecast an individual’s risks for five deadly diseases. Researchers have developed a tool that surveys alterations in DNA and millions of points in the genome.  Philippe Plailly/Science Source By  Gina Kolata Aug. 13, 2018 Leer en español Scientists have created a powerful new tool to calculate a person’s inherited risks for heart disease, breast cancer and three other serious conditions. By surveying changes in DNA at 6.6 million places in the human genome, investigators at the Broad Institute and Harvard University were able to identify many more people at risk than do the usual genetic tests, which take into account very few genes. Of 100 heart attack patients, for example, the standard methods will identify two who have a single genetic mutation that place them at increased risk. But the new tool will find 20 of them, the scientists reported on Monday in the journal Nature Genetics . The researchers are now building a website that will allow anyone to upload genetic data from a company like 23andMe or Ancestry.com. Users will receive risk scores for heart disease, breast cancer, Type 2 diabetes, chronic inflammatory bowel disease and atrial fibrillation. People will not be charged for their scores. A risk score, including obtaining the genetic data, should cost less than $100, said Dr. Daniel Rader, a professor of molecular medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Rader, who was not involved with the study, said the university will soon be offering such a test to patients to assess their risk for heart disease. For now, the university will not charge for it. Dr. Sekar Kathiresan, senior author of the new paper and director of the Center for Genomic Medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital, said his team had validated the heart risk calculation in multiple populations. But DNA is not destiny , Dr. Kathiresan stressed. A healthy lifestyle and cholesterol-lowering medications can substantially reduce risk of heart attack, even in those who have inherited a genetic predisposition. The new tool also can find people at the low end of the risk range for the five diseases. This should prove useful to certain patients: for example, a woman who is trying to decide when she should start having regular mammograms, or a 40-year-old man with a slightly high cholesterol level who wants to know if he should take a statin. Still, there are concerns about how the genetic test will be used. “It carries great hope, but also comes with a lot of questions,” said Dr. David J. Maron, director of preventive cardiology at Stanford University. “Who should get tested? How should the results be provided? Physicians are not generally well trained to provide genetic test results.” And, he wondered, will the results actually lead people to make decisions that improve their health? People may need genetic counseling before and after getting these sorts of risk scores, noted Eric Schadt, dean of precision medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Patients may not appreciate the consequences of learning they have a high likelihood of having a heart attack or breast cancer or one of the other diseases the test assesses. “Do people really understand that once you learn something you cannot unlearn it?” said Dr. Schadt, who is also chief executive of Sema4, a diagnostics company. But medical experts said this sort of risk assessment is the wave of the future. “I’m not sure we can stop it,” said Dr. John Mandrola, a cardiac electrophysiologist at Baptist Health in Louisville, Ky. The study began because there was general agreement among researchers that many common diseases are linked not to one mutation, but rather to thousands or millions of mutations, said the first author of the new paper, Dr. Amit V. Khera, a cardiologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and a researcher at the Broad Institute. In recent years, scientists have cataloged more than 6 million tiny changes in DNA that slightly affect the chances that people will get various diseases. Each of those genetic alterations has such a small effect — a 1 percent or so increase or decrease in a person’s odds of getting a disease — that it would not be helpful to test for each one in isolation. But it should be possible, scientists felt, to combine data on all the small DNA changes to construct an individual risk score. To do that, the researchers needed a new algorithm that would weigh the significance of the variations in the genes. Then they had to test the risk scores they obtained. Dr. Khera and his colleagues turned to the U.K. Biobank, which holds genetic and disease information on half a million people. The investigators found that their algorithm did predict the odds of being diagnosed with one of the five diseases. But the U.K. Biobank consists mostly of white Europeans. So the investigators also tested and validated their method in populations of East Asians, South Asians, African Americans and Hispanics. The researchers also tried their algorithm on 20,000 patients who were seen at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital. They found that those who had a high risk score for a heart attack were indeed four times more likely to have had a heart attack than other patients. “Unless I do this genetic testing, there is no way I could pick those people out,” Dr. Khera said. Just as important is finding people at very low risk, he and other researchers said. At the University of Pennsylvania, doctors will incorporate risk scores on heart attacks into advice to patients on preventive care. Dr. Rader said he often sees healthy patients in their 30s and 40s with a family history of heart disease. They have borderline levels of LDL cholesterol, the dangerous kind. But many do not want to start taking a statin. For now, he said, he does his best to assess their risk, then tells some of them “it’s kind of up to you” whether to take a statin. But that advice “is not very satisfying,” he said. A sophisticated genetic risk score might decide the matter. “If you have a really high score, here’s your prescription,” he said. “If your score is pretty low, you can hold off.” This sort of sophisticated genetic analysis is still very new, Dr. Mandrola noted. But, he said, in five or 10 years doctors “may look back on the way they predict risk today and ask, ‘What were we thinking?’”
Years of Education Influenced by Genetic Makeup, Enormous Study Finds More than a thousand variations in DNA were involved in how long people stayed in school, but the effect of each gene was weak, and the data did not predict educational attainment for individuals. In the largest genetics study ever published in a scientific journal, an international team of scientists on Monday identified more than a thousand variations in human genes that influence how long people stay in school . Educational attainment has attracted great interest from researchers in recent years, because it is linked to many other aspects of people’s lives, including their income as adults, overall health and even life span. The newly discovered gene variants account for just a fraction of the differences in education observed between groups of people. Environmental influences, which may include family wealth or parental education, together play a bigger role. Still, scientists have long known that genetic makeup explains some of the differences in time spent in school. Their hope is that the data can be used to gain a better understanding of what educators must do to keep children in school longer. With a fuller understanding of the influences exerted by genes, scientists think they will be able to better measure what happens when they try to improve a child’s learning environment. The new study, published in the journal Nature Genetics, finds that many of the genetic variations implicated in educational attainment are involved in how neurons communicate in the brain. A striking number are involved in relaying signals out of neurons and into neighboring ones through connections called synapses. The findings are based on genetic sequencing of more than 1.1 million people. But the subjects were all white people of European descent. In order to maximize the odds of discovering genetic links, the scientists say they needed a very large, homogeneous sample. When the team tried to use these genetic variants to explain differences in schooling time among African-Americans, the predictions failed. The researchers also found that genes don’t have a uniform effect: The influences of the genes varied from country to country. The researchers could not pinpoint the cause of these differences. But if educators in one country emphasize memory over problem-solving in math classes, for example, then some gene variants may provide a bigger benefit to some students than others, the scientists speculated. A truly global understanding of these genetic influences will require similarly huge studies of people of other ancestries, the researchers said. The data cannot be used to predict educational attainment in any particular schoolchild. The researchers cautioned that the genetic patterns are seen only in large groups; in each child, genetics will play only a small role in how long she stays in school. “It’s not really meaningful for individuals,” said Aysu Okbay, a geneticist at Vrije University in Amsterdam and a co-author of the new study. The first glimpses of genetic influences on education attainment came in the 1970s . In the era before cheap DNA sequencing, researchers studied families. Identical twins, who share the same set of genes, tended to have more similar track records in school than did fraternal twins, researchers found. Later studies that compared siblings to half-siblings, or to siblings adopted into different families, also confirmed a modest genetic influence . In the early 2000s, a few social scientists tried to confirm links between particular genes and schooling, but their efforts largely failed. One of the most important reasons was the small size of their studies. In 2011, Daniel J. Benjamin, a behavioral economist at the University of Southern California, and his colleagues launched a large-scale expedition into human DNA. They formed the Social Science Genetic Association Consortium to bring together information on thousands of subjects . The researchers piggybacked their educational research on medical research. When people volunteer for a genetic study on, say, blood pressure, they often fill out questionnaires about various aspects of their lives. One of the most common questions is how much education they’ve had. By 2016, Dr. Benjamin and his colleagues had studied nearly 300,000 people and had linked 71 gene variants to education. But then two major developments in DNA testing helped the team greatly expand their research. Recently, a genetic database called UK Biobank was launched in Britain. Some 442,183 of those genetic profiles were added to the consortium’s study. And after 23andMe scientists began sharing information about customers who volunteer to be part of scientific research, the team included 365,538 of those profiles. Studying the DNA of these people, Dr. Benjamin and his colleagues found a number of genetic variations that were unusually common in people who finished a lot of school, and others that were more common in people who left school early. Often, the scientists weren’t able to rule out chance as the explanation. But 1,271 of these variants were linked so tightly to schooling that they could not be dismissed. Still, the association between each gene variant and education was very weak. When the researchers compared groups of people with or without a particular variant, their average time in school differed only by days. The researchers scanned the DNA surrounding these influential variants and found an intriguing pattern. “They’re not just randomly scattered around the genome,” said James J. Lee, a behavioral geneticist at the University of Minnesota and co-author of the new study. The variants are linked to genes active in the brain, helping neurons to form connections. A key to educational attainment may not be how quickly information is acquired, but how quickly it can be shared between various regions. “Maybe it’s not about how fast a signal can zip along a cable,” Dr. Lee said. “It’s about the complexity of the connections between point A and B.” But the genetic links suggest another, perhaps stranger possibility: Some variants linked to education work not in the brains of students, but in the people they inherited the variants from — their parents. By somehow shaping the behavior of parents, these variants may alter the environments in which children grow up in a way that helps or impinges on time spent in school. Based on their findings, Dr. Benjamin and his colleagues figured out how to calculate a genetic “score” for educational success. The more variants linked to staying in school longer, the higher an individual’s score. The researchers calculated a score for a group of 4,775 Americans, ranking them into five groups. The researchers found that 12 percent of people in the lowest fifth finished college. Among people in the top fifth, 57 percent finished college. A similar result emerged when the scientists looked at how many people in each group had to repeat a grade in school. In the lowest fifth, 29 percent did, while in the top fifth, only 8 percent did. But when Dr. Benjamin and his colleagues calculated scores for African-Americans, it failed to predict how well different groups had done in school. One likely reason is that genetic markers aren’t reliable guides to how genes influence traits in different populations. Dr. Benjamin and his colleagues hope to grow their study to 2 million people or more, and expect to find thousands more genes linked to education. He and other researchers plan to carry out other studies on behavior based on gene profiles of one million people or more. Indeed, the latest study is just the newest in what promises to be a tide of huge genetic studies. Research on insomnia based on 1.3 million people, for example, was posted to an open access website earlier this year . A number of similar studies, each involving over a million people, are moving toward publication. “It’s all going to happen really fast,” said Dr. Benjamin. 
The start-up Color Genomics has quickly become a leader in employee genetic screening and counseling. It tests for harmful genetic mutations that could increase the risk of developing certain hereditary cancers or high cholesterol.  Jason Henry for The New York Times Sections Skip to content Skip to site index Employees Jump at Genetic Testing. Is That a Good Thing? Genetic disease risk screening is becoming a popular employee benefit. But the tests may not be all that beneficial for the general population, experts say. The start-up Color Genomics has quickly become a leader in employee genetic screening and counseling. It tests for harmful genetic mutations that could increase the risk of developing certain hereditary cancers or high cholesterol. Levi Strauss & Company introduced a novel benefit for employees at its San Francisco headquarters last fall: free genetic screening to assess their hereditary risks for certain cancers and high cholesterol. Chip Bergh , Levi’s chief executive, said he had hoped that the tests would spur employees to take preventive health steps and in that way reduce the company’s health care costs. But even Mr. Bergh was surprised by the turnout. Of the 1,100 eligible Levi’s employees, more than half took the genetic tests. Now, he wants to extend the benefit to employees in other cities. “It really is a differentiator,” Mr. Bergh said. West Coast companies vying for talent offer an unusual array of benefits like college loan repayment, egg freezing , surrogacy assistance and, for new mothers away on business trips, overnight breast milk shipping . Some companies have added genetic screening as well, and employees are lining up for the tests. Instacart, Nvidia, OpenTable, Salesforce, SAP, Slack, Stripe and Snap have offered the screenings as an employee benefit. So have some companies based on the East Coast, like General Electric Appliances and Visa. All of them, including Levi’s, work with Color Genomics, a start-up that has quickly become a leader in employee genetic screening and counseling. But the use of screenings as an employee benefit is becoming more commonplace just as federal health agencies , researchers, and physicians are wrangling over whether the tests, originally developed to establish patients’ inherited risks of developing certain diseases, are ready for widespread adoption. The company has reduced genetic testing costs by using robotics and machine learning and eliminating tasks like in-person prescreening by doctors.  Jason Henry for The New York Times The tests screen for inherited gene mutations that can greatly increase a person’s risk of developing diseases like colon cancer or breast cancer. Doctors now regularly suggest them for high-risk patients, such as people who have close family members with certain cancers. But for people of average risk in the general public, a screening may not be all that useful — and could even cause harm, experts said. A person without a family history of cancer may have the same problematic mutations as high-risk patients, they said, but could have lower risk of developing cancer. A federal advisory panel on evidence-based preventive medicine currently recommends against routine screening for certain harmful breast cancer mutations for women who do not have cancer or a family history of cancer. The group concluded that the net benefit of routine genetic screening for these women could range from minimal to potentially harmful. “There is exactly no evidence that systematic screening of the general healthy population for rare genetic conditions will have a net benefit in terms of health outcomes,” said Dr. Jonathan Berg , an associate professor of genetics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. In fact, most cancers are not the result of the hereditary mutations in single genes that these tests detect. Some experts cautioned that extending use of the tests to the broader population may lead some people of average risk to forgo recommended screening tests like colonoscopies. And they warned that it could also lead people to undergo unnecessary medical procedures, including going to the extreme of having surgery to remove their breasts. Othman Laraki, chief executive of Color, said that by using genetics, “you can help some people prevent or interrupt something at an earlier stage where the costs are much lower.” “You could scare the living daylights out of people unnecessarily,” said Dr. Stephen J. Chanock, director of the division of cancer epidemiology and genetics at the National Cancer Institute. The Food and Drug Administration, however, recently took the opposite stance. It authorized 23andMe, a consumer genetics company that had already received agency clearance to market several hereditary disease risk tests, to offer a test directly to consumers for three breast cancer gene mutations common in people of Eastern European Jewish descent. While regulators called their decision a step forward in the availability of direct-to-consumer genetic screening, they explicitly warned that the test did not detect most mutations that increase breast cancer risk. They also warned consumers not to use the tests as a substitute for qualified medical care and genetic counseling. Color, the genomics company, takes something of a middle road. It markets comprehensive medical diagnostic tests that screen for all mutations of certain genes known to be linked to certain kinds of heredity cancers and heart risks. It has doctors available to order its tests online for users and provides genetic counseling to discuss users’ results. “By using genetics, you can help some people prevent or interrupt something at an earlier stage where the costs are much lower,” said Othman Laraki, chief executive of Color Genomics. The start-up advises users that they could develop major diseases even if their test results show no harmful mutations. A robotic testing machine at Color. A growing number of tech companies are offering genetic screening as a benefit just as federal health agencies, researchers, and physicians are wrangling over whether the tests are ready for widespread adoption.  Jason Henry for The New York Times Executives at SAP and Nvidia said they hoped genetic screening might ultimately help prevent at least a few late-stage cancers, the kinds of life-threatening illnesses that can debilitate employees and cost companies with self-funded health plans more than $1 million in medical fees. After Nvidia began offering free screening from Color last year, about 27 percent of its 6,000 eligible employees in the United States took the test. After SAP started subsidizing the genetic tests last year, about 17 percent of the company’s 30,000 eligible employees and family members participated. “In the long-term view of a program like this, it’s going to pay for itself,” said Jason J. Russell, who oversees employee compensation and benefits for SAP North America. And, he added, “You are creating good will with employees.” Given the expense of screening more people of average risk — as well as follow-up costs from additional tests, medicines, surgery and potential complications from surgeries — experts said that overall medical expenditures were actually likely to increase. Even so, they said, spending on screening for conditions like hereditary high cholesterol, which increases risk for strokes and heart attacks before the age of 50, could ultimately prolong some lives. “You are getting good preventive care value for money, ” said David L. Veenstra, a professor at the University of Washington who studies health outcomes and economics. Color has raised $150 million from venture capital firms like General Catalyst as well as Bay Area tech luminaries including Max Levchin, a PayPal co-founder; Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive; and Laurene Powell Jobs, a philanthropist-investor who is the widow of the Apple co-founder Steve Jobs. The company has reduced genetic testing costs by using robotics and machine learning and eliminating tasks like in-person prescreening by doctors. It charges $249 for hereditary risk screening for eight of the most common cancers and began offering that price while more established medical diagnostics firms were charging $4,000 for similar tests. The price point appealed to OpenTable. It started offering genetic screening benefits after an employee with a history of cancers told executives she was spending thousands of dollars out of her own pocket to pay for hereditary risk tests. “This was a really interesting opportunity to provide some choice to our employees that was accessible and affordable so they could better understand their own personal health,” said Christa Quarles, chief executive of OpenTable. As for privacy concerns, executives at several companies said that Color regularly sent them aggregated data on the number of employees with harmful disease mutations, but that the data is not tied to identifying details like employees’ names or birth dates. As more large-scale research is conducted, medical recommendations may change. More than 150,000 patients , for instance, have enrolled in a DNA sequencing study at Geisinger Health, a medical center in Danville, Pa. And the federal advisory panel is updating its recommendation on genetic screening for certain breast cancer mutations. Executives at several companies that have signed up with Color said they were aware of the debate over genetic screening, but said they believed the start-up was simply ahead of the curve. “Over time, innovation becomes consensus science,” said Mr. Russell of SAP.
The Secret to Long Life? It May Lurk in the DNA of the Oldest Among Us Clarence Matthews, 110, had blood drawn at his home in Indian Wells, Calif., last year, part of a project to examine the genes of the very old. Mr. Matthews died a few months ago. As one of the exceedingly rare members of her species to live beyond age 110, Goldie Michelson had divulged her secrets to longevity countless times before dying last year at 113. “Morning walks and chocolate,” the Worcester, Mass., resident and onetime oldest living American told the steady stream of inquisitors that marked her final years. Unlike the growing ranks of nonagenarians and centenarians, those who breach a 12th decade, known as supercentenarians, rarely face protracted illness or disability before they die, a boon that many of them have ascribed to personal habits. “I try to live the truth,” said Shelby Harris, who threw out the first pitch of the local minor league baseball team’s 2012 season a few months before he died at 111 in Rock Island, Ill. Emma Morano of Verbania, Italy, still cooking her own pasta until a few years before she died last April at 117, prescribed raw eggs, and no husband . But even as they indulged the notion that exceptionally healthy longevity can be explained by lifestyle, each agreed to donate DNA to a private effort to find the secrets in supercentenarian genes. The full genetic sequences of Ms. Michelson, Mr. Harris and Ms. Morano are among some three dozen genomes of North American, Caribbean and European supercentenarians being made available this week by a nonprofit called Betterhumans to any researcher who wants to dive in . A few additional genomes come from people who died at 107, 108 or 109. If unusual patterns in their three billion pairs of A’s, C’s, G’s and T’s — the nucleobases that make up all genomes — can be shown to have prolonged their lives and protected their health, the logic goes, it is conceivable that a drug or gene therapy could be devised to replicate the effects in the rest of us. “I hope you find something that does someone some good,” said Clarence Matthews, 110, who allowed his blood to be drawn as a final contribution to the database last year at his Indian Wells, Calif., home while I watched at his  side . Collecting genetic samples from supercentenarians was no easy task: They were hard to find, and they sometimes died before samples could be taken.  Ivan Kashinsky for The New York Times The rare cache of supercentenarian genomes, the largest yet to be sequenced and made public, comes as studies of garden-variety longevity have yielded few solid clues to healthy aging. Lifestyle and luck, it seems, still factor heavily into why people live into their 90s and 100s. To the extent that they have a genetic advantage , it appears to come partly from having inherited fewer than usual DNA variations known to raise the risk of heart disease, Alzheimer’s disease and other afflictions. That is not enough, some researchers say, to explain what they call “ truly rare survival ,” or why supercentenarians are more uniformly healthy than centenarians in their final months and years. Rather than having won dozens of hereditary coin tosses with DNA variations that are less bad, scientists suggest, supercentenarians may possess genetic code that actively protects them from aging. But the effort to find that code has been “challenged,” as a group of leading longevity researchers put it in a recent academic paper , in part by the difficulties in acquiring supercentenarian DNA. The New England Centenarian Study, one of a handful of longevity research groups around the world focusing on supercentenarians, now turns down prospective DNA donors under age 103: “We tell them they’re too young,” said Dr. Thomas Perls, the study’s director. The DNA sequences being released this week were acquired almost single-handedly by James Clement, 61, the founder of a company advised by the prominent Harvard geneticist George Church . A professed citizen-scientist, Mr. Clement collected blood, skin or saliva from supercentenarians in 14 states and seven countries over a six-year period. Many were still gardening, arguing, driving and flirting. Ms. Michelson, for one, was fond of reading and reciting Shakespeare. The usefulness of such a small group for a genetic study is unclear , which is one reason Mr. Clement’s company , now defunct, has turned into a crowdsourcing project. Complex traits like height, body mass index and disease risk — phenotypes, as they are known in genetics-speak — typically arise from a combination of hundreds of places in the genome where the DNA alphabet differs between individuals. Zeroing in on which variations affect which phenotypes requires the statistical power of tens of thousands of DNA samples — almost certainly a dealbreaker when it comes to supercentenarians, whose verified number, worldwide, hovers at around 150 . On large swaths of the planet, where birth records are sketchy or nonexistent, identifying verified supercentenarians is virtually impossible. In the United States, researchers say supercentenarians account for about one in five million people. Amateur genealogists dedicated to validating the ages of the world’s oldest people estimate that even the unverified total comes to only about 1,000. Still, some researchers hope that despite the limited number of available genomes, it will be possible to identify the secret sauce of supercentenarians with methods used to uncover the genetic basis for other rare  conditions . No one quite knows how many genomes might be necessary. “This is what we call an ‘extreme phenotype,’ ” said Dr. Church, who ultimately arranged for the genomes to be sequenced so that Mr. Clement could release them through a nonprofit. “The farther out you go on the bell curve, the more likely you are to find something, even with a small sample size.” As the goal of slowing aging to extend human “health span” has gained traction in the scientific mainstream, research has largely been limited to animal studies. A secretive Google spinoff called Calico, for California Life Company , is said to be scrutinizing the genome of the naked mole rat, celebrated for a life span 10 times longer than that of most of its rat cousins. Federally funded scientists are testing a drug on monkeys based on an experiment that doubled the lives of roundworms . And in laboratories across the world, the markers of age in over-the-hill mice , rats and turquoise killifish are, sometimes , being  reversed . But what works in shorter-lived organisms often does not translate to humans, whose average life span in developed countries is approaching 80 years. So despite the limitations of Mr. Clement’s database , several prominent researchers have already expressed interest in it. “This could show the utility of starting a bigger collection,” said Paola Sebastiani , a longevity researcher at Boston University. An account of what Mr. Clement calls the Supercentenarian Research Project offers a glimpse at what that might entail, including perseverance, compassion and a sense of humor that trends toward dark. Life or Death It was an inauspicious start, Mr. Clement admitted in an email to a friend in January 2011. The first supercentenarian Mr. Clement had lined up to visit, Mississippi Winn, had died at 113 before he could get from his home in San Jose, Calif., to hers in Shreveport, La. he posted on the Facebook page that family members had set up for Ms. Winn, believed to be the last living child of African-Americans born into slavery . Such condolences would become a familiar refrain. Of the 70,000 or so Americans who live to be 100 , only some two dozen are typically alive at 110 . Once that milestone is reached, as Mr. Clement quickly learned, the chance of dying within the next year is roughly 50 percent. After 113, the odds are closer to 66 percent. The oldest person on record, Jeanne Calment, was 122 when she died in 1997; only one other person is known to have lived beyond age 118. “Even while you’re packing the car, the person may fall ill and say they’re not up to it,” Mr. Clement said, after the first of several plans for me to observe a DNA donation was abruptly canceled. Mr. Clement could extract DNA from post-mortem samples, with permission from the family and assuming he could reach the funeral home in time. Exhumation is also possible, in theory, to obtain samples. But for understandable reasons, he said, family members most often ended communications with him at the time of a supercentenarian’s death. To improve the odds of getting samples — and the gender balance, since supercentenarians are nearly all women — he lowered his target age from 110 to 106. “It’s better to get there when they’re alive,” he said. Guided by the World’s Oldest People email list, whose moderator, Robert D. Young, verifies ages on behalf of Guinness World Records and tracks supercentenarians for the Gerontology Research Group , Mr. Clement placed decal dots designating the locations of prospective participants on a map pinned to the wall of his home office. He created Google alerts for the phrases “109th birthday,” “110th birthday,” and “111th birthday,” and for the obituaries of known supercentenarians. Unlike so-called blue zones , where centenarians are said to cluster , there is no geographical shortcut for netting supercentenarians. So he called, emailed and sent Facebook friend requests to whatever contacts he could find, wherever he could find them. A Birthday Invitation There was, nominally, the prospect of making money. But with a business plan that, even to some of his investors, sounded more like a research project, Mr. Clement seems to have undertaken the task largely because it provided the chance to act on a longstanding interest in human longevity, including his own. A self-described transhumanist who eats mostly low-glycemic vegetables and nuts and walks seven miles a day, Mr. Clement has accumulated an eclectic résumé that includes starting a brew pub, practicing international tax law and cofounding a futurist magazine. He harbors what he prefers to call a “healthy love of life,” rather than an aversion to death, and he is possessed of an apparently genuine conviction that longer lives would make humans more humane. The geneticist George Church at Harvard Medical School in Boston. Dr. Church has devoted a portion of his laboratory to research into reversing aging.  Gretchen Ertl for The New York Times “My hat was off to someone who was willing to take the time out of his life to go get these precious specimens,” said Dr. Church, the Harvard geneticist, who has devoted a portion of his laboratory to research into the reversal of aging. The kind of ultrarare mutations that supercentenarians might harbor, Dr. Church believed, were not likely to be detected with standard techniques, which scan only the places in the genome where DNA is already known to vary between individuals. To look for as-yet-uncataloged variations would require sequencing all of the supercentenarians’ six billion genetic letters, a far more expensive procedure. When he and Mr. Clement first discussed the idea in 2010, the cost was about $50,000 per genome. But the price was falling . And with the financial support of a handful of like-minded wealthy individuals who agreed to invest in the exploratory phase of the project, “it just seemed,” Mr. Clement said, “like something I could do.” Even with the Harvard name as a calling card, several of the families he contacted over the next few years did not respond to his inquiries. A few, Mr. Clement knew, had already been approached by laboratories at Stanford and Boston University , which were collecting their own stashes of supercentenarian DNA. “She already did her DNA donation,” Paul Cooper, the grandson of Besse Cooper, a 116-year-old former suffragist , told Mr. Clement, who had driven several hundred miles to her Monroe, Ga., nursing home in 2012. Walter Breuning, of Great Falls, Mont., one of just a handful of men known to have lived to 114, replied in late 2010 that it was his preference not to risk winter meetings. He died early the next spring . An invitation to the 111th birthday party of James Sisnett in Barbados finally served as Mr. Clement’s entree in February 2011. He died two years later. Mr. Sisnett, who grew his own food until he was 105, was “still fascinated by seeing a nice-looking backside” when he was in his 110s, his daughter, Everine Carter, 88, recalled in a telephone interview. Losing Precious Samples The best time to get DNA from a supercentenarian, Mr. Clement found, is midmorning. By lunchtime, they would prefer to be eating. After lunch, they might be groggy or napping. Most, like Dorothy Peel of London, then 108, had sharp minds. Ms. Peel inspected the informed consent form through her reading glasses and peppered him with questions about other supercentenarians he had met. Dorothy Peel signed the consent form to participate in the supercentenarian study.  James Clement Crisscrossing Europe in 2011, Mr. Clement hit his collecting stride. But there were some bumps. He had ordered an inexpensive kit that allowed him to prick a supercentenarian’s finger and deposit a drop of blood on a card to preserve it, often used by geneticists in the field. Within a few months he had blood drops from 15 donors, including Ralph Tarrant of Sheffield , England, who at 108 completed the London Times crossword puzzle every afternoon. Not until he had switched to hiring a phlebotomist to perform blood draws with a needle did he learn that the cards with the original 15 samples were defective. “We could not detect any DNA,” read a 2011 email from the laboratory. Mr. Clement confessed the news to Dr. Church in a meeting at his Harvard office. “You didn’t test the cards?” the geneticist asked him gently. Still, Mr. Clement had 23 good samples in hand, and the cost of sequencing by this time had fallen to some $15,000 per genome. With his remaining funds, he sequenced 15, leaving the rest in cold storage.  Mr. Clement holding blood samples from Clarence Matthews.  Ivan Kashinsky for The New York Times Mr. Clement quickly discovered 2,500 differences between the supercentenarian DNA and those of controls. But even with help from graduate students in Dr. Church’s lab, it was hard with such a small group to know which, if any, were significant. So over the next few years, Mr. Clement, working without a salary, collected samples whenever he could, adding another dozen from supercentenarians across the United States. In the spring of last year, a company Dr. Church had co-founded, Veritas Genetics , announced that it would sequence human genomes for $1,000 each. Dr. Church told Mr. Clement that Veritas would sequence the remaining samples, and so he set out to collect a few more. Advice From America’s Oldest Man  Asked how one could hope to live a long, healthy and happy life, Mr. Matthews offered some advice: “Keep breathing.”  Ivan Kashinsky for The New York Times In July 2016, I was invited to accompany Mr. Clement to Mr. Matthews’s home in California. As much as I looked forward to meeting my first supercentenarian, I was not prepared to envy his win in the genetic longevity lottery. I had feared he would be lonely, a concern echoed by several of the Facebook viewers who watched me ply him with questions over a live video stream the morning we met. “I don’t want to outlive my friends and family,” one typed. “That’s no fun.” The prospect of shifting today’s average life span to that of the known limit of all humanity is disorienting. An average life expectancy of 80 in some ways seems generous — it was just 48 when Mr. Matthews was born in 1906. Most of us expect around 80 years on the planet, assuming nothing horrendous happens. “When you have children the first time, it don’t come with a manual, and it don’t come with a manual when your dad gets to be 100, then 105, then 110,” said Mr. Matthews’s son, Steve, 75, who also gave blood the day we visited. But Mr. Matthews asserted without hesitation that he still enjoyed life. Pleasures included his lunchtime smoothie, his family, the kindness of his caregiver, and — this with a nod to a New York Times photographer and a rakish grin — “having my picture taken.” He reminisced fondly about his second wife, Katherine, who died in 1980 and with whom he had loved to dance. At 110, he said he had never been diagnosed with a serious illness. The younger Mr. Matthews recalled that his father had played a one-under-par, 18-hole golf game on his 99th birthday. Having built a successful real estate business, he provided financial support to his last surviving sibling, a sister who was 105. Talking to him, it was hard not to fantasize about the possibility that, as another Facebook participant suggested, “by the time we get to that age, we may all be living to 110.” At the time the oldest man in America, Mr. Matthews sometimes strained to hear, but his sense of humor and perspective were intact. If that was what we wanted, he advised, “Keep breathing.” Mr. Matthews died this summer. His DNA was sequenced a few weeks later, and last month Mr. Clement uploaded it to the database. Like all normal human genome sequences, the beginning of his first chromosome reads like this: TAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCT Whether, in combination with the genomes of his fellow supercentenarians, the rest contains the secret to a long, healthy and happy life remains to be seen. 
Students at West Chester University in Pennsylvania have volunteered to take part in ancestry DNA testing. Anita Foeman, a communications professor, says she has found that conversations around race are “complicated and jagged.”  West Chester University Race and identity in many ways define who we think we are, while modern genetics can challenge those notions. To delve into these issues, I am involved with a communication studies project at West Chester University in Pennsylvania that explores narratives at the intersection of race and identity. For the last decade, I have invited hundreds of people to be part of ancestry DNA tests. But first I ask people how they identify themselves racially. It has been very interesting to explore their feelings about the differences between how they define themselves and what their DNA makeup shows when the test results come in. Biologically, our ancestral differences reflect only a 0.1 percent difference in DNA. Yet we often cling to those differences — both in unity with our fellow people of origin and, at times, in divisiveness. Over all, the experiment has provided a special opportunity to explore the lines of race. I found that as human beings, our strategies for survival are the same, and our similarities far outweigh our differences. Not surprising, some volunteers came up with stereotypes like “I thought my biological father might be black; I heard he liked basketball,” or “Wow, a little Asian; that’s why my son is good at math!” Some had hoped the DNA tests would allow them to challenge prejudices in their own families.  But inside each comment was a longing to find out more. And a long-term, ever-deepening conversation began. What started out as a curiosity turned into a study. My colleague Bessie Lee Lawton and I began our collaboration in 2012, and a more rigorous protocol was established. Statistical analysis was done to look for patterns not easily gleaned from individual stories.  Speaking in generalities, we found that women were more flexible about their racial identity than men; that people of color expected diversity in their backgrounds more than people of European ancestry; and that younger people were more open to diversity than older ones. People of European background tended to have more anxiety, before and after the test.  Keep in mind that analyzing a person’s ancestry through DNA, means looking back hundreds of years. People receive only half of their DNA from each parent, and therefore the race or identity of either parent may be too diluted to show up in these tests.  Participants in the research study were asked to predict their ancestral backgrounds before test results come in.  West Chester University As a black girl growing up in the 1960s, I often felt race undermined me. I was expected to love Motown, but not ballet. I was praised for speaking standard English, but my interest in the sciences was never appreciated and certainly not cultivated. Random doors opened; others closed. It took me 10 years before I tested myself. What I found both confirmed and shook my perspective. My background included African heritage from the Gold Coast, including Nigeria and Ghana, intermingled with British and Scandinavian. I suspect this reflects the impact of the brutal Viking Age and later the English in the slave trade. I have a smattering of Asian genes, most likely from indigenous Americans crossing the Bering Strait . For Americans, about 4 percent of our ancestry traced to Asia may actually reflect Native American roots. However, my grandfather shared with me years ago that in his birthplace of Mobile, Ala., his earliest memories were of Chinese merchants living alongside poor black folks like him. So who knows? Today I look at faces, even my own, with new recognition. I see that people regularly share narratives that miss something their physical features suggest, and sometimes we find ancestry that we would not have imagined. It is a new twist on an old narrative made possible by cutting-edge science. The conversation is complicated and jagged, and it mercifully undermines neat, simplistic stories. Over the last 11 years, more than 2,000 people have taken part in our DNA ancestry project . Below are the stories from a handful of them. — Anita Foeman , professor of communication studies Have you had your DNA tested to find your ancestry? If so, did you find anything surprising or intriguing? Share your thoughts with us by email to racerelated@nytimes.com Tanya Identifies as: African-American  Her prediction: 50% African-American, 25% Native American, 25% European Her comments before the test: My mom shared that I was part Native American — even told me a specific tribe. But I am wondering if this is true, because I could not consistently verify information with other senior relatives.  Results:  78% African, 17% European, 2% Asian, 2% West Asian, 1% Pacific Islander Thoughts about her ancestry results: When I questioned my Aunt Morra when there was no Native American in my profile, she said, “Oh honey, we just thought that was a nice story to tell, especially since we have such nice high cheekbone structure.” Hunter Identifies as: White  His prediction: 100% European  His comments before the test: I would say I am an American, a descendant of Benjamin Rush, representative from Pennsylvania who signed the Declaration of Independence.  Results: 99% European, 1% Middle Eastern Thoughts about his ancestry results: Since coming to college I have seen so many new people, had new experiences. Finding some Middle Eastern in my background was one of them. That fact caught my mother off guard. Bernard Identifies as: Black; father is black and mother is white  His prediction: 50% European, 50% African His comments before the test: My mother said, “I know you are me, but no cop is going to take the time to find out your mother is white.” She was very specific about raising me as a black man.  Erica C. Thompson/West Chester University Results: 91% European, 5% Middle Eastern, 2% Hispanic; less than 1% African and Asian Thoughts about his ancestry results: What are you trying to do to me? You have caused a lot of problems in my family. I know my nose is sharp and my skin is light, but my politics are as black as night. Today, I don’t identify as mixed. I reject my white privilege in a racist America. There is no way that I or my kids will identify as anything other than black. Erica Identifies as: Multiracial (black and white)  Her prediction: Not Latina! 50% African, 50% European, maybe some Native American  Her comments before the test: I identify as multiracial. My mother is half-German, half-English/Irish/Spaniard. My father is African-American, with possible Native American background. My mother was raised to see the world in black and white, with the white being the superior side. My father learned early on from his home teachings and personal experiences that the cards were not stacked in his favor.  Erica C. Thompson/West Chester University Results: 48% African, 37% European, 14% Native American, 1% Other Author’s note:  Erica was tested twice. The first time, results from the lab came back as predominantly Latina, which does not reflect a single geographic region. She protested that characterization so vehemently that we asked for a rerun based on strictly geographic lines.  Her profile then came back as above, which she described as “correct.”  Rajvee Identifies as: Indian  His prediction: 90% Asian, 10% African His comments before the test: In India, we have two main ethnic groups: Aryan and Dravidian. I am from the southern part of India, and I belong to the Dravidian group. Africa is the cradle for human civilization, and I think that my origin can be traced back to Africa.  Erica C. Thompson/West Chester University Results: 93% Asian, 7% Pacific Islander Thoughts about his ancestry results: I believe that we can all trace our roots back to Africa. I believe in being a citizen of the world, and we humans are all connected by flesh and blood. 
Last week’s exploration of people’s reactions to their DNA makeup prompted readers to share  what they learned when their test results came in. Adoptees wrote in about the relief they felt in making a discovery about their roots. Others expressed delight when the outcome confirmed their beliefs. Some questioned the tests’ accuracy. A few unearthed family  secrets – that a parent was not theirs, or that brothers and sisters were actually half-siblings. The hunger to learn more about ethnic origins is pushing many to delve deeper. So will we. We’re planning more coverage on ancestry and origins, but this issue is devoted to your stories. We selected a few from hundreds, and edited them for clarity and space. Sara Norvell I had my DNA tested about five years ago to determine my ethnic genetic background. Earlier, I had found evidence from the National Archives that my great-grandfather was a member of the United States Colored Troops, and on that record it listed his prior slave owner. After the test results came in, I matched as fourth cousins with a woman in Charleston, S.C., who was a direct descendant of the slave owner. Thus, my great-great grandfather was a slave owner who owned my great-grandfather but was also his father. Holly Hafer My maternal grandmother’s maiden name was Mozingo. She was from North Carolina.  My maternal grandfather’s family was Irish with the last name Lee. My father’s side of the family was English. I saw an article by a man named Joe Mozingo who said all Mozingos in the United States were descendants of Edward Mozingo, who came to Virginia from Africa in the 1600s. He came as an indentured servant and was, supposedly, only 10 to 15 years old. My daughter and I learned that I am .6 percent sub-Saharan African and she is .3 percent. My mother learned that she is 1 percent Sub-Saharan African. I traced our ancestry back ten generations and it clearly shows that Edward Mozingo is our ancestor, and that he was an African who married an English woman while it was still legal for him to do so. I am proud of my ancestor and can only imagine the life he had to live. There are “white” and “black” branches of the family. I would have been forced to attend another high school if this were common knowledge in the 1950s and 60s because schools were segregated then.  It is funny to me that as a blond, blue-eyed girl, I was a cheerleader and homecoming queen. This would have never happened if the truth had been known. Kezia-Alean Osunsade There were few parts of my ancestry that I was rather sure of, but others were completely a mystery. My father was born and raised in Nigeria, with both of his parents coming from the Yoruba tribe. My mother is African-American and knows very little about her ancestry. Due to her fairer skin and loose curl pattern, people often would ask her: “What are you mixed with?” Family members told stories about being Native American, but could never identify a tribe. My mother believed that due to America’s dark past with slavery, she would never find the answer to these questions that have lingered for generations. My results showed that my mother is mainly African, but  also Irish. She now has a sense of fulfillment for finally getting an answer. Even my father found out new information. I turned out to have more ancestry in Benin than Nigeria. African-Americans face a nearly impossible feat tracing their ancestry using conventional methods, but using DNA provides new insights that did not previously exist.   Franziska Barczyk John Reinhart My great-great grandfather came to America from Germany in 1860s. I’ve always identified with my German heritage. So, big surprise when DNA tests show I am almost 70 percent English/Irish. I forgot about all those English-Irish women my German ancestors married, and completely forgot my mother’s contributions.  Now I’m mourning all those Saint Patrick’s days that I failed to celebrate. Janis Owens I’m a genealogist, and six years ago had my DNA done. I have my paper tree going back many generations with only a few brick walls. I am a white woman from Jackson County, Fla., which borders Alabama, and almost all of my family has lived in South Alabama since the early 1800s. My mother and I are very light skinned, with light eyes. My father was hazel eyed, with darker complexion and black hair. His family was known to have Jewish blood and Native American from Kentucky. They self-described as “Little Black Dutch” even as late as the 1950s. The large majority of my DNA was Moroccan Berber, Turkish and Spanish/French. The majority of Moroccan Berber was the great inexplicable mystery, though Alabama relatives moved there in the 1820s from coastal South Carolina, where the Spanish were known to have “Moorish” slaves. I do have a small amount of Native American DNA, but the Moroccans won this round. All my relatives fought for the Confederacy and were staunch Baptists and Methodists, and I have actually written a cookbook on Southern cooking. I mean, we are deep-fried Moroccan Berbers down here. Chi Anne McGrew I was excited to see my background as I come from a very diverse family.  On my mother’s side, my grandfather moved north from Arkansas to Kansas in the 1930s because he could “pass” for white and people did not know his family. My paternal great-grandmother was 100 percent Cherokee and her family had been moved with the Trail of Tears. Imagine my surprise when I discovered I couldn’t be whiter: 100 percent Northern European. I called my Dad and let him know that Grandma was not a Cherokee princess. He countered with her tan as evidence. So, for my stepmother’s birthday. I sent them both the kit., too. We are anxiously awaiting the results, but I suspect that the only color in our family is going to be in the tales we apparently tell. Maryellen Shpak I tested my DNA early this year.  I had expected to be mostly Irish as I had Irish immigrant grandparents on both my maternal and paternal sides.  I was totally floored to learn I was 28 percent Eastern European Jewish!  Quite a shock for this presumed Irish Catholic girl! Mazel tov!   Franziska Barczyk Katie Hutchison I was adopted at birth to a wonderful family, but always wondered about my ancestry. Should I go to an Irish festival? Can I buy a kilt? Do I have an excuse to eat excessive amounts of paczki? I am fairly pale, so I always assumed I was Irish/Scottish/Polish/Finnish/etc. or some other very white European nationality. My results showed 50 percent European and 50 percent Middle Eastern.  My top two countries were Tunisia and Qatar, and that kind of blew my mind because it had never occurred to me, based on my features and skin tone.  In 2015, Ohio opened all their closed adoption records. I applied for and received my original birth certificate. After some investigative work by me, I found my birth family. I have not contacted any of them, but they believe that they are Scottish and French. Tunisia was a French protectorate from 1881-1956 so the Tunisian heritage also makes historical sense. I am glad I know my ancestral heritage.  My daughter is turning 5 years old in May and wants an Aladdin/Jasmine-themed birthday party, and I am incorporating some Tunisian dishes. Jamie Swezey I was adopted from South Korea as an infant, and I traveled to Seoul last year to do a birth family search. I had been in contact through letters and photos with my birth family — Mom, Dad, two older sisters — before arriving. We met and had an incredibly emotional reunion. A couple of weeks later, after getting our DNA test results back to confirm that we were in fact biological family, we found out that we were not related. It is most likely that I was switched at or closely after birth with another baby girl. All of my records are wrong, and essentially I hold another adoptee’s baby and birth family identity, while she unknowingly holds mine. I never would’ve found any of this out had I not done the DNA test. There are legal, bureaucratic, cultural, and more challenges in Korea and the U.S. when it comes to contacting the other adoptee, so it’s probable that I will never find my counterpart or true biological family.  Carl Johnson I am a 55-year-old American male of African descent. I have a dark complexion and grew up in rural East Tennessee with my mother’s relatives. I wanted to have DNA testing done to confirm rumors of my Native American heritage. To my surprise, my results were 84 percent West African, 14 percent European, and 2 percent East Asian. My bigger dilemma is: How do I embrace my European origins? It’s assumed that the European DNA was obtained by force during slavery. I think that is most likely. But what if my European ancestors were indentured servants who worked closely with African slaves and a real romance evolved, despite the cultural norms of that time, and now here I am? If I am true to myself and the scientific evidence that provides richness to the DNA I’ve inherited, I now need to figure out a way to honor all of me and those who survived to make me possible. The journey and adventure continues. 
F.D.A. Will Allow 23andMe to Sell Genetic Tests for Disease Risk to Consumers. The Food and Drug Administration said on Thursday that it would allow the company to sell genetic tests directly to consumers. For the first time, the Food and Drug Administration said it would allow a company to sell genetic tests for disease risk directly to consumers, providing people with information about the likelihood that they could develop various conditions, including Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. The move on Thursday is a turnaround for the agency, which had imposed a moratorium in 2013 on disease tests sold by the company, 23andMe, which is based in Mountain View, Calif. The decision is expected to open the floodgates for more direct-to-consumer tests for disease risks, drawing a road map for other companies to do the same thing. 23andMe will now be reporting telltale markers for 10 diseases. Most, like factor XI deficiency , a blood clotting disorder, and Gaucher disease type 1 , an organ and tissue illness, and celiac disease are rare. Anyone who buys the $199 Ancestry and Health test from the company will automatically learn if they have mutations increasing their risk for those diseases. Risk genes for Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s are treated separately. Customers will have to specifically say that they want that information. The company’s website offers links to genetic counselors for those who are weighing whether to be tested. If they want those results they will be included at no extra charge, though patients have to pay for the counseling separately. Until now, the only way for people to get such genetic tests was to see a medical professional who would order a test and later deliver the results to patients. Often, patients were required to see a genetic counselor before getting a test. The process for customers is simple. A customer spits into a tube and then mails it to 23andMe. The company’s lab extracts DNA from the saliva cells and tests it with probes that find genetic markers using a special chip for genotyping. In about six to eight weeks the company sends the customer an email saying the results are in. By logging onto an online account, the customer can see the report and its interpretation. It will include not just the genes for disease risk, but also reports of ancestry and results on things like how much the person is likely to weigh and whether alcohol will elicit flushing of the face, shoulders and neck, or even the entire body. This is not the first foray by 23andMe into direct-to-consumer disease risk testing; several years ago it marketed tests to consumers claiming it could provide genetic information for a variety of diseases from a simple saliva sample. But when the F.D.A. shut that endeavor down in 2013, it told the company it had to prove that its tests were accurate, and that customers understood their results. The F.D.A. established on Thursday what it called “special controls” to permit the company to sell the tests, and future ones, if it met those requirements. The company did that and Tara Goodin, a spokeswoman for the F.D.A., said the agency now intends to issue a new exemption allowing other companies to market similar tests under the same conditions. While some applaud the F.D.A.’s move, saying people do not always need the intervention of medical professionals and genetic counselors to learn their risk for certain diseases, others worry that it sets a dangerous precedent. People often need genetic counseling before deciding they want to know if they are at risk for Parkinson’s disease, said James Beck, chief scientific officer of the Parkinson’s Foundation. “Once you get the test and read the results, there is no going back,” Dr. Beck said. But Dr. Robert Green, a genetics professor at Harvard Medical School, said that most people who want to get such information on their own are able to handle it just fine. He has studied tests for Alzheimer’s risk in rigorous studies, asking if patients who simply got their results, without counseling, understood what they were doing and were able to handle the information. The vast majority were, he said.  Anne Wojcicki, chief executive at 23andMe in November 2015. “The difference between then and now is that we now have authorization to tell you about your personal risk,” she said.  Brad Barket/Getty s “I do not want to be cavalier,” Dr. Green added. “In some cases people did not realize what they were saying yes to and others did not realize the psychological impact it would have on them. There is some potential for distress, but it is much, much smaller than was anticipated.” The test’s results do not by any means guarantee that a person will get the disease. Instead, they mean the disease is only more likely. With Alzheimer’s, for example, the test looks for a gene variant called ApoE4. Those with one copy of that gene have a threefold increased risk of Alzheimer’s. Those with two ApoE4 genes have a 15-fold increased risk. The actual risk depends on age, but even having two copies of ApoE4 does not foreordain the disease, Dr. Green emphasized. For Parkinson’s disease, the company looks for two mutations, LRRK2 and GBA, each of which increases risk. The LRRK2 increases it by 25 percent and GBA increases it fourfold. But if a person of Ashkenazi Jewish background inherits LRRK2, the risk increases to eightfold. But those risks must be put in perspective said Dr. Beck of the Parkinson’s Foundation. Parkinson’s disease is rare — about one million Americans, out of about 330 million — have it. The new test approval comes just two years after 23andMe got approval for a different kind of testing that determines whether people carry certain gene mutations for diseases. In 2015, the F.D.A. allowed the company to tell customers if they had a copy of a mutated gene for a disease like cystic fibrosis that would not affect them — you need two copies of such mutated genes to get the disease — but could affect their future children. If a person with one copy of a cystic fibrosis gene, for example, has children with a partner who also has one copy of the mutated gene, each child has one chance in four of inheriting a mutated gene fromeach parent. If that happens, the child would get the disease. But the new approval takes the testing a giant step forward. “The difference between then and now is that we now have authorization to tell you about your personal risk,” said Anne Wojcicki, chief executive at 23andMe. 23andMe has been providing the same genetic tests the F.D.A. just authorized to customers in Britain and Canada, which have more lenient regulations, since 2014. The company says it has followed more than 20,000 customers in Britain who got their genetic risk results. “There were no untoward incidents,” Ms. Wojcicki said. But nothing is easy in this new world of direct to consumer genetics, noted Dr. Gail P. Jarvik, head of the division of medical genetics at the University of Washington, in an email. “If people know what they are purchasing and understand the results, then I support such tests,” she said. “It is in the execution that my concerns lie and I will be following that. We have seen patients who did not understand tests they purchased from this company in the past. Hopefully, this information will be delivered in a way that has value to the person purchasing the service and does not cause unneeded medical visits. Many of these tests indicate risk of getting disease, not the certainty of getting it. And that, she said, “can be a challenging concept to communicate.” 
Matter In ‘Enormous Success,’ Scientists Tie 52 Genes to Human Intelligence  Blood samples from some participants in a new study of genes linked to intelligence were held at the U.K. Biobank, above. In a significant advance in the study of mental ability, a team of European and American scientists announced on Monday that they had identified 52 genes linked to intelligence in nearly 80,000 people. These genes do not determine intelligence, however. Their combined influence is minuscule, the researchers said , suggesting that thousands more are likely to be involved and still await discovery. Just as important, intelligence is profoundly shaped by the environment. Still, the findings could make it possible to begin new experiments into the biological basis of reasoning and problem-solving, experts said. They could even help researchers determine which interventions would be most effective for children struggling to learn. “This represents an enormous success,” said Paige Harden, a psychologist at the University of Texas, who was not involved in the study. For over a century, psychologists have studied intelligence by asking people questions. Their exams have evolved into batteries of tests, each probing a different mental ability, such as verbal reasoning or memorization. In a typical test, the tasks might include imagining an object rotating, picking out a shape to complete a figure, and then pressing a button as fast as possible whenever a particular type of word appears. Each test-taker may get varying scores for different abilities. But over all, these scores tend to hang together — people who score low on one measure tend to score low on the others, and vice versa. Psychologists sometimes refer to this similarity as general intelligence. It’s still not clear what in the brain accounts for intelligence. Neuroscientists have compared the brains of people with high and low test scores for clues, and they’ve found a few. Brain size explains a small part of the variation, for example, although there are plenty of people with small brains who score higher than others with bigger brains. Other studies hint that intelligence has something to do with how efficiently a brain can send signals from one region to another. Danielle Posthuma, a geneticist at Vrije University Amsterdam and senior author of the new paper, first became interested in the study of intelligence in the 1990s. “I’ve always been intrigued by how it works,” she said. “Is it a matter of connections in the brain, or neurotransmitters that aren’t sufficient?” Dr. Posthuma wanted to find the genes that influence intelligence. She started by studying identical twins who share the same DNA. Identical twins tended to have more similar intelligence test scores than fraternal twins, she and her colleagues found. Hundreds of other studies have come to the same conclusion, showing a clear genetic influence on intelligence . But that doesn’t mean that intelligence is determined by genes alone. Our environment exerts its own effects, only some of which scientists understand well. Lead in drinking water, for instance, can drag down test scores. In places where food doesn’t contain iodine, giving supplements to children can raise scores. Advances in DNA sequencing technology raised the possibility that researchers could find individual genes underlying differences in intelligence test scores. Some candidates were identified in small populations, but their effects did not reappear in studies on  larger groups . So scientists turned to what’s now called the genome-wide association study: They sequence bits of genetic material scattered across the DNA of many unrelated people, then look to see whether people who share a particular condition — say, a high intelligence test score — also share the same genetic marker. In 2014, Dr. Posthuma was part of a large-scale study of over 150,000 people that revealed 108 genes linked to schizophrenia . But she and her colleagues had less luck with intelligence, which has proved a hard nut to crack for a few reasons. Standard intelligence tests can take a long time to complete, making it hard to gather results on huge numbers of people. Scientists can try combining smaller studies, but they often have to merge different tests together, potentially masking the effects of genes. As a result, the first generation of genome-wide association studies on intelligence failed to find any genes. Later studies managed to turn up promising results, but when researchers turned to other groups of people, the effect of the genes again disappeared.  Danielle Posthuma, a geneticist at Vrije University Amsterdam.  Yvonne Compier But in the past couple of years, larger studies relying on new statistical methods finally have produced compelling evidence that particular genes really are involved in shaping human intelligence. “There’s a huge amount of real innovation going on,” said Stuart J. Ritchie, a geneticist at the University of Edinburgh who was not involved in the new study. Dr. Posthuma and other experts decided to merge data from 13 earlier studies, forming a vast database of genetic markers and intelligence test scores. After so many years of frustration, Dr. Posthuma was pessimistic it would work. “I thought, ‘Of course we’re not going to find anything,’” she said. She was wrong. To her surprise, 52 genes emerged with firm links to intelligence. A dozen had turned up in earlier studies, but 40 were entirely new. But all of these genes together account for just a small percentage of the variation in intelligence test scores, the researchers found; each variant raises or lowers I.Q. by only a small fraction of a point. “It means there’s a long way to go, and there are going to be a lot of other genes that are going to be important,” Dr. Posthuma said. Christopher F. Chabris, a co-author of the new study at Geisinger Health System in Danville, Pa., was optimistic that many of those missing genes would come to light, thanks to even larger studies involving hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of people. “It’s just like astronomy getting better with bigger telescopes,” he said. In the new study, Dr. Posthuma and her colleagues limited their research to people of European descent because that raised the odds of finding common genetic variants linked to intelligence. But other gene studies have shown that variants in one population can fail to predict what people are like in other populations. Different variants turn out to be important in different groups, and this may well be the case with intelligence . “If you try to predict height using the genes we’ve identified in Europeans in Africans, you’d predict all Africans are five inches shorter than Europeans, which isn’t true,” Dr. Posthuma said. Studies like the one published today don’t mean that intelligence is fixed by our genes, experts noted. “If we understand the biology of something, that doesn’t mean we’re putting it down to determinism,” Dr. Ritchie said. As an analogy, he noted that nearsightedness is strongly influenced by genes. But we can change the environment — in the form of eyeglasses — to improve people’s eyesight. Dr. Harden predicted that an emerging understanding of the genetics of intelligence would make it possible to find better ways to help children develop intellectually. Knowing people’s genetic variations would help scientists measure how effective different strategies are. Still, Dr. Harden said, we don’t have to wait for such studies to change people’s environments for the better. “We know that lead harms children’s intellectual abilities,” she said. “There’s low-hanging policy fruit here.” For her part, Dr. Posthuma wants to make sense of the 52 genes she and her colleagues discovered. There are intriguing overlaps between their influence on intelligence and on other traits. The genetic variants that raise intelligence also tend to pop up more frequently in people who have never smoked. Some of them also are found more often in people who take up smoking but quit successfully. As for what the genes actually do, Dr. Posthuma can’t say. Four of them are known to control the development of cells, for example, and three do an assortment of things inside neurons. To understand what makes these genes special, scientists may need to run experiments on brain cells. One possibility would be to take cells from people with variants that predict high and low intelligence. She and her colleagues might coax them to develop into neurons, which could then grow into “mini-brains” — clusters of neurons that exchange signals in the laboratory. Researchers could then see if their genetic differences made them behave differently. “We can’t do it overnight,” Dr. Posthuma said, “but it’s something I hope to be able to do in the future.”
The FTC is investigating DNA firms like 23andMe and Ancestry over privacy. Popular DNA testing companies like 23andMe and Ancestry.com are being investigated by the Federal Trade Commission over their policies for handling personal info and genetic data, and how they share that info with third parties. advertisement The probe was revealed in the agency’s response to a Freedom of Information Act request by Fast Company last month seeking records pertaining to 23andMe and Ancestry.com. The FTC denied the FOIA request, saying in its letter that any records “would be exempt from disclosure . . . because disclosure of that material could reasonably be expected to interfere with the conduct of the Commission’s law enforcement activities.” The agency cited an exemption— 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(7)(A) —which has often been interpreted by journalists as the disclosure of an investigation. A spokesperson for the agency declined comment, saying that “FTC investigations are non-public, and so typically we do not comment on an investigation or even whether we are investigating.” Privacy issues in the use of such DNA testing kits came to the forefront last month with the arrest of the notorious Golden State Killer, when it was revealed that police had used data from GEDMatch , a genealogy research site where users upload genealogical and genetic information, to help identify the suspect. When contacted by Fast Company , spokespersons for 23andMe and Ancestry.com said they’re rarely approached by law enforcement for genetic data . Yet as the DNA testing market has exploded— worth approximately $99 million in 2017 and expected to increase to $310 million by 2022 —concerns have also grown about the use of genetic data. Many consumers don’t realize that their personal info may be shared with third-party companies and there have been complaints raised that the companies’ terms of service are not always clear about their policies in such matters. There are also growing concerns about the security of personal DNA data. On Monday, Israel-based DNA testing service MyHeritage announced a security researcher had uncovered tens of millions of account details for some 92 million customers, including email addresses and hashed passwords. The company said it had no reason to believe user data was compromised, and claimed that users’ DNA data is stored on separate systems. Joel Winston, an attorney who specializes in privacy law and formerly served as a deputy attorney general for the state of New Jersey, said he welcomed the FTC probe. “DNA data is the most important data you own. Your DNA is you,” he wrote in an email. “An enforcement action by the FTC would send a clear message that for-profit companies cannot use the fine print to quietly take an ownership interest in their customers’ DNA. Companies must not be permitted to mislead, deceive, or confuse customers about how their DNA data is being collected, analyzed, and monetized. “If the FTC finds that any DNA testing company has failed to obtain the full, informed consent of its customers, then the FTC would be expected to prohibit the company from using, sharing, or selling any such DNA data in its possession,” he said. The FTC probe appears to have been prompted by a letter from Sen. Chuck Schumer last November, in which the senate minority leader expressed concern that popular at-home DNA test kits could be putting consumer privacy at great risk : “Besides, putting your most personal genetic information in the hands of third parties for their exclusive use raises a lot of concerns, from the potential for discrimination by employers all the way to health insurance. That’s why I am asking the Federal Trade Commission to take a serious look at this relatively new kind of service and ensure that these companies have clear, fair privacy policies and standards for all kinds of at-home DNA test kits. We don’t want to impede research but we also don’t want to empower those looking to make a fast buck or an unfair judgement off your genetic information. We can find the right balance here, and we must.” In response, the agency wrote to Schumer, saying that while it “cannot comment on whether we are investigating specific companies,” it shared his desire for companies to be transparent about the collection and use of their genetic data. An Ancestry spokesperson declined to comment on any investigation or whether it has been contacted by the FTC, but emphasized: “Protecting our customers’ privacy is our highest priority—starting with our belief that customers should always maintain ownership and control over their own data. We do not and will not sell DNA data to insurers, employers, health providers, or third-party marketers and will only share DNA data with researchers if the customer has consented. Customers can request that their data and accounts be deleted at any time.” 
Popular genetics-testing company 23andMe is partnering with drug giant GlaxoSmithKline to use people's DNA to develop medical treatments, the company announced in a blog post yesterday (July 25).  During the four-year collaboration, the London-based GlaxoSmithKline will use 23andMe's genetic database to zero in on possible targets and treatments for human disease.  "The goal of the collaboration is to gather insights and discover novel drug targets driving disease progression and develop therapies," GlaxoSmithKline said in yesterday's statement , where it also reported it was investing $300 million in 23andMe. [ How Do DNA Ancestry Tests Really Work? ]  It's not yet clear which conditions will be investigated during the collaboration, but one example showed how the collaboration might work: the two companies' previous collaboration on the gene LRRK2, which is linked to some cases of Parkinson's disease, Forbes reported .  Only about 10,000 of the 1 million Americans with Parkinson's disease have the disease because of LRRK2. So, GlaxoSmithKline has to test about 100 Parkinson's patients to find just one potential candidate. However, 23andMe has already provided 250 Parkinson's patients who have agreed to be re-contacted for GlaxoSmithKline's clinical trials, which may help the pharmaceutical company develop the drug much faster, Forbes reported.  However, not everybody is on board with 23andMe's new partnership. If a person's DNA is used in research, that person should be compensated, said Peter Pitts, president of the Center for Medicine in the Public Interest.  "Are they going to offer rebates to people who opt in, so their customers aren’t paying for the privilege of 23andMe working with a for-profit company in a for-profit research project?" Pitts said to NBC .  In addition, even though 23andMe gets the consent of its customers to use their genetic data, it's unlikley that most people are aware of this.  "The problem with a lot of these privacy policies and Terms of Service is that no one really reads them," Tiffany C. Li, a privacy expert and resident fellow at Yale Law School’s Information Society Project, told Tom's Guide , a Live Science sister site. "You are paying to help the company make money with your data."  The new collaboration isn't the first time 23andMe's vast pool of genetic data has been mined by scientists. The San Francisco startup has already published more than 100 scientific papers based on its customers' data, according to yesterday's blog post, by Anne Wojcicki, 23andMe's co-founder and chief executive. In 2015, the company launched 23andMe Therapeutics, which focuses on developing "novel treatments and cures based on genetic insights from the consented 23andMe community," Wojcicki wrote.  23andMe has more than 5 million customers worldwide who have had their DNA analyzed for ancestral data. People who would like to close their 23andMe accounts can go here , but the company notes that "any research involving your data that has already been performed or published prior to our receipt of your request will not be reversed, undone, or withdrawn."  However, once a 23andMe account is closed, any spit samples that a person initially gave consent to be stored "will be discarded," the company said.